                                                                                                        199

                                          Movement Disorders
                                                                                    Blair Ford, MD
                                                                   Howard Geyer, MD, PhD            15
                                                                     Susan B. Bressman, MD

subthalamic nucleus, making up an extrapyramidal motor
control system with extensive, reciprocal connections to the
thalamus, cortex, brainstem, and cerebellum.
    Many movement disorders are treated symptomatically,
using agents that suppress or reduce unwanted movements,
but in some cases therapies are available that address the
underlying pathophysiology. In recent decades, treatment
options including pharmacologic and surgical approaches
have expanded, thanks to advances in basic sciences such as
genetics and neurophysiology. In the sections that follow,
the major movement disorder syndromes are described,
with an emphasis on clinical diagnosis and treatment.



   ▼▼PARKINSONISM & PARKINSON DISEASE

               ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS

▶  Tremor at rest
▶  Bradykinesia

▶  Rigidity
▶  Loss of postural reflexes
▶  Flexed posture
▶
   Freezing

▶General Considerations

The term parkinsonism may be used when a patient exhibits
one or more of the following findings: tremor at rest, brady-
kinesia, rigidity, loss of postural reflexes, flexed posture, and
freezing. Two of these findings, at least one of which must
be tremor at rest or bradykinesia, are required to make a
diagnosis of definite parkinsonism. Parkinson disease (PD)
makes up 80% of cases of parkinsonism. PD has a prevalence
of about 160 cases per 100,000 people and an incidence of
Movement disorders are conditions that produce either
reduced or excessive movement. Neurologic disorders that
result in a paucity or slowness of movement are termed
hypokinetic disorders. The category of hypokinetic disorders
is represented by Parkinson disease and other causes of
parkinsonism.     Hyperkinetic disorders are characterized by
excessive, involuntary movements. Hyperkinetic disorders
can usually be placed into one of five main categories of
abnormal movement: dystonia, chorea, tremor, myoclonus,
or tic.
    Abnormal movements may be difficult to recognize or
categorize because of their unusual appearance, complexity,
subtlety, or variability. Movement disorder specialists tend
to isolate or reduce abnormal movements to their unitary
components, but often it is the pattern of the movement
and its body part distribution that provides the important
diagnostic clue. In addition, many diseases cause abnormal
movements that can be fit into two or more categories or
abnormal movement phenomenology. Table 15–1 provides
descriptions of the main categories of movement disorders.
    There are many other types of abnormal movements that
do not fit cleanly into a simple classification of phenom-
enology.   Athetosis, meaning “no fixed posture,” was first
coined in reference to postanoxic birth injury to denote a
quivering “fibrillary” movement of the limbs and digits. In
modern usage, the term describes a slow, continuous, writh-
ing movement that bears similarities to both chorea and
dystonia. Ballism refers to large-amplitude random flinging
movements of the limbs and represents a proximal form of
chorea. Unilateral ballism is termed hemiballism and is most
often caused by an infarct of the contralateral subthalamic
nucleus. Akathisia, meaning “inability to sit,” describes inner
restlessness and intolerance of remaining still, together with
repetitive fidgeting, squirming, and pacing movements.
    Many, but not all, movement disorders result from dis-
ordered function of the basal ganglia, a group of intercon-
nected subcortical nuclei. The basal ganglia comprise the
substantia nigra, putamen, caudate, globus pallidus, and
---
              200                                                         CHAPTER 15

Table 15–1.         General classification of abnormal movements.
                                                            Description and Associated
                     Category of Movement                         Clinical Features
 Hypokinetic      Parkinsonism                      Akinesia/bradykinesia, Rigidity
                                                    Tremor at rest
                                                    Postural instability
                                                    Gait freezing
                                                    Flexion posture




 Hyperkinetic     Dystonia                          Torsional movements that are partially
                                                        sustained and produce twisting
                                                        postures



                  Chorea                            Random, quick, unsustained,
                                                        purposeless movements that have an
                                                        unpredictable, flowing pattern




                  Tic                               Stereotyped, automatic purposeless
                                                        movements and vocalizations


                  Myoclonus                         Sudden, shock-like movements




                  Tremor                            Repetitive oscillation of a body part










































▶Pathogenesis
The key motor symptoms of PD result from degeneration
of dopamine [DA]-producing neurons within the pars

compacta of the substantia nigra and norepinephrine [NE]
cells of the locus coeruleus in the brainstem. However, PD
is a complex clinical disorder that includes various nonmo-
tor manifestations including impaired olfaction, autonomic
dysfunction (eg, constipation, orthostatic hypotension),
sleep disturbance (eg, rapid-eye movement [REM] behavior
disorder), and alterations in mood and cognition. Underly-
ing these clinical symptoms (many of which may precede
overt motor signs) is pathology involving neurons outside
the substantia nigra (eg, medullary and olfactory nuclei).


                            Differential Diagnosis
Parkinson disease
Diffuse Lewy body disease
Atypical neurodegenerative Parkinson syndromes: Progressive supranuclear
    palsy (PSP), multiple systems atrophy (MSA), corticobasoganglionic
    degeneration (CBGD)
Hydrocephalus
Vascular parkinsonism
Neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism
Wilson disease
Idiopathic or primary dystonia
Dopa-responsive dystonia
Anoxic-hypoxic injury
Trauma
Post-encephalitic dystonia
Tardive dystonia
Huntington disease
Neuroacanthocytosis
Post-infectious chorea
Drug-induced chorea
Vascular chorea
Autoimmune chorea
Chorea gravidarum
Tourette syndrome
Cerebral palsy/developmental delay syndromes
Autism
Huntington disease
Physiologic myoclonus
Essential myoclonus
Metabolic encephalopathy
Postanoxic myoclonus
Progressive myoclonic epilepsy
Essential tremor
Physiologic tremor
Parkinson tremor
Cerebellar tremor
         about 20 cases per 100,000 people per year. Prevalence and
         incidence increase with age. Prevalence at age 70 is about
         550 cases per 100,000 people, with an approximate incidence
         of 120 cases per 100,000 people per year. The mean age of
         symptom onset is 56 years in both sexes. However, the age
         range is wide, and young-onset PD (occurring in patients
         younger than 40 years) is not infrequent. PD is nearly twice
         as common in men as in similarly aged women. Family his-
         tory of PD appears to be associated with an increased risk for
         development of PD, and mutations in identified PD genes
         account for 5–40% of cases depending on an individual’s
         ancestry. Most of the remainder of cases are thought to be
         etiologically complex, resulting from gene–environment and
         gene–gene interactions.
---
                                                                                            MOvEMENT DISORDERS                                                                      201

     The pathologic hallmark of PD is the presence of eosino-
philic cytoplasmic inclusions, termed                 Lewy bodies,        within
many of the surviving neurons. When symptoms become
clinically evident, 60% of dopaminergic neurons in the sub-
stantia nigra already have been lost, and the basal ganglia
(striatal) dopamine level has decreased by 80%. The precise
cause of degeneration of dopaminergic cells within the
substantia nigra is unknown in most individuals, but recent
advances in molecular genetics have clarified genetic influ-
ences that contribute to the development of neuronal toxicity
and parkinsonism in highly penetrant, autosomal dominant
or autosomal recessive familial PD. Mutations in six genes
(SNCA, LRRK2, PRKN, DJ1, PINK1, and                         ATP13A2) have
conclusively been shown to cause familial parkinsonism. In
addition, common variations in three genes (MAPT, LRRK2,
and SNCA) and loss-of-function mutations in GBA have been
well validated as susceptibility factors for PD. These genes
encode proteins such as α-synuclein, parkin, and DJ-1, which
are involved in folding, trafficking, and clearance of intracel-
lular proteins and in maintaining mitochondrial function.
Gene mutations result in mishandling of intracellular pro-
teins, increased oxidative stress, free-radical formation, and
energy depletion within the cell, causing oxidative damage
and cell death. See Table 15–2 for a description of the gene
mutations involved in PD. A currently influential hypothesis
posits that PD results from the spread of α-synuclein from
one neuron to another in a manner resembling the behavior
of prions.

                    Table 15–2.        Parkinson disease genes.
                      Gene Mutation         Inheritance                              Phenotype                                                          Pathology
                     SNCA                 AD                Early-onset rapidly progressive parkinsonism with dementia;      α-Synuclein Lewy bodies, frequent tau inclusions, neuronal loss
                                                                overlap with DLBD and MSA                                        in brainstem [LC and SNpc], and hippocampus
                     Parkin               AR                Early-onset parkinsonism, with slower course; sleep benefit,     SNpc neuronal loss with absent Lewy bodies
                                                                dystonia, hyperreflexia, levodopa-responsive, prone to
                                                                dyskinesias
                     PINK1                AR                Early-onset PD, with psychosis                                   Lewy body pathology, SNpc neuronal loss, sparing LC
                     DJ-1                 AR                Early-onset parkinsonism, with tremor, falls, poor response to   Sever SN and LC neuronal loss, prominent diffuse Lewy bodies,
                                                                levodopa, dementia; rare                                         including cortex
                     LRRK2                AD                Late onset, tremulous PD                                         Neuronal loss in LC and SNpc
                                                            Most prevalent monogenic cause of PD; most common
                                                                mutation G2019S
                     GCH1                                   Childhood-onset dystonia-parkinsonism [dopa-responsive           Absent Lewy bodies
                                                                dystonia]
                     GBA                  AR                Typical levodopa-responsive PD, earlier onset,                   LB pathology, cortical involvement
                                                                common cognitive impairment, prevalent among
                                                                Ashkenazi Jews

▶Prevention
In PD, preventive strategies have focused on neuroprotec-
tion of healthy dopamine-producing cells. However, no drug
or dietary supplement has been shown with certainty to have
neuroprotective or restorative benefits, despite well-con-
trolled clinical trials of various agents including monoamine
oxidase (MAO)-B inhibitors, coenzyme Q10, and vitamin E.


▶Clinical Findings
A.    Symptoms and Signs

The cardinal motor findings of PD include resting tremor,
bradykinesia, rigidity, loss of postural reflexes, flexed pos-
ture, and freezing. Onset of symptoms is insidious and usu-
ally unilateral. Progression is usually slow.

1.   Resting tremor and bradykinesia—These are the
most characteristic motor features of PD. Tremor at rest
with a frequency of four to six cycles per second is the
presenting symptom in 70% of patients. Classically, rest-
ing tremor remains in one limb or asymmetrically in the
ipsilateral arm and leg for months or years, but over time
may generalize to all limbs. Although resting tremor usually
involves distal limbs, it may also affect the muscles of the
lips, tongue, jaw, and trunk. Occasionally the tremor is felt as
an inner tremor before it can be seen. Typically, the tremor
disappears with action of the involved limb and reemerges
                    AD = autosomal dominant; AR = autosomal recessive; DLBD = dementia with Lewy bodies; GBA = glucocerebrosidase; LC = locus coeruleus;
                    LRRK2 = leucine-rich repeat kinase 2; MSA = multiple system atrophy; PD = Parkinson disease; SNCA = α-synuclein; SNpc = substantia nigra,
                    pars compacta.
---
      202                                                                               CHAPTER 15

with maintained posture. Stress, excitement, and walking                                                     and visuospatial impairment. Sensory symptoms include
can increase the tremor.                                                                                     pain, burning, and tingling. Autonomic disturbances include
      Bradykinesia manifests as a slowness in activities of daily                                            constipation, impotence, low blood pressure, and inad-
living, production of movement, and reaction time and con-                                                   equate bladder emptying. Nonmotor symptoms can cause
tributes to lack of automatic movement. Clinically, patients                                                 significant impairment and should be sought and treated as
exhibit impaired fine motor movements, loss of facial                                                        necessary.
expression, reduced arm swing when walking, and flexed
(stooped) posture. Reduced amplitude of movement is most                                                     B.      Laboratory Tests and Imaging Studies
evident with repetitive movements such as finger or toe tap-
ping. Hypomimia (decreased facial expression) results in                                                     To date, there is no blood or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
decreased blink rate and loss of facial gestures. Other signs                                                test that can diagnose PD. Similarly, there is no biological
of bradykinesia include quiet voice (hypophonia), tachyphe-                                                  marker that can diagnose presymptomatic PD. Certain neu-
mia, sialorrhea, micrographia, and difficulty rising from a                                                  roimaging studies can be useful in confirming a diagnosis of
seated position.                                                                                             PD. Routine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is typically
2.    Rigidity—Patients with PD have a sustained increased                                                   normal in patients with PD. Single-photon emission com-
                                                                                                             puted tomography (SPECT) using 123I-ioflupane permits
resistance to movement of a limb when that limb is pas-                                                      visualization of the density of dopamine transporters in
sively extended, flexed, or rotated. Often cogwheeling can be                                                the basal ganglia; it is approved by the US Food and Drug
appreciated, reflecting tremor superimposed upon rigidity.                                                   Administration (FDA) for differentiating PD, in which
The rigidity may occur proximally at the neck, shoulders,                                                    dopamine transporter density is reduced, from essential
or hips or distally at the elbows, wrists, knees, and ankles.                                                tremor (see below), in which it is normal. However, this
Shoulder pain or stiffness is a frequent initial manifestation                                               modality cannot distinguish PD from atypical parkinsonian
of PD and is often misdiagnosed as a rotator cuff injury,                                                    syndromes (see below). Another imaging modality which
arthritis, or bursitis.                                                                                      can be of use is positron emission tomography (PET) imag-
3.    Loss of postural reflexes—A sign of advancing disease,                                                 ing of the brain using18F-fluorodopa, which shows signifi-
loss of postural reflexes is evident as spontaneous retropul-                                                cant decreases in fluorodopa uptake in the basal ganglia of
sion or inability to maintain balance when pulled from                                                       patients with PD. In general, a diagnosis of PD can be made
behind. Early in the course of the disease postural reflexes                                                 clinically without neuroimaging studies.
are preserved.
4.
sodes of inability to initiate stepping, can be one of theFreezing—This symptom, which refers to brief epi-  ▶Differential Diagnosis
most disabling symptoms of PD, and it may prove resistant                                                    The diagnosis of PD is based on history, clinical examina-
to levodopa treatment. Also referred to as                                                motor blocks,      tion, and the absence of incompatible clinical, laboratory,
freezing typically occurs on initiation of walking, upon                                                     or radiologic abnormalities. No single feature absolutely
turning, or when walking through narrow passages, cross-                                                     confirms or excludes the diagnosis of PD. Initial response to
ing streets, or approaching a destination or target, such as                                                 levodopa, which is often dramatic, is expected in PD, but is
a chair. Patients experience inability to move their feet, as                                                not specific as it can also occur early in the course of atypical
if glued to the ground, lasting seconds. Freezing that occurs                                                parkinsonian syndromes.
early or predominantly in the course of disease should raise                                                        Specific features that suggest the presence of an atypi-
suspicion of an alternative diagnosis such as an atypical par-                                               cal parkinsonian syndrome rather than PD include sym-
kinsonian syndrome. Festination can occur during walking;                                                    metric onset of symptoms; absence of tremor; early gait
patients take faster and faster steps and step size becomes                                                  abnormalities, including early falls and prominent freezing;
smaller. Freezing, festination, and loss of postural reflexes                                                early postural instability; dementia that precedes motor
are important causes of falling in patients with PD.                                                         symptoms or occurs within the first year; corticospinal
                                                                                                             signs; cerebellar signs; abnormal eye movements other
5.    Nonmotor symptoms—Nonmotor symptoms occur                                                              than restricted upward gaze; and symptomatic orthostatic
frequently in patients with PD and some (eg, depres-                                                         hypotension.
sion, anxiety, impaired olfaction, constipation, akathisia,                                                         Other          major          causes          of     parkinsonism  are  listed        in
REM behavior disorder) may precede overt motor signs by                                                      Table 15–3. Drugs that block dopamine receptors (typical
years. Cognitive changes are common and include slowed                                                       and atypical neuroleptics, certain antiemetics) or deplete
cognitive functioning (bradyphrenia); prolonged time to                                                      striatal dopamine (reserpine, tetrabenazine) cause                                    drug-
verbalize thoughts may be prominent. Dementia eventu-                                                        induced parkinsonism; after the causative drug is stopped
ally occurs in 20–40% of patients with PD (for further                                                       the symptoms usually improve slowly and resolve in most
discussion, see Chapter 9). Behavioral symptoms include                                                      but not all cases. Anticholinergic drugs can improve par-
personality changes, depression, reduced attention span,                                                     kinsonism caused by antidopaminergic drugs.
---
                                                                                MOvEMENT DISORDERS  203

prevent the progression of disease, although several have
been evaluated in clinical trials with largely disappointing
results. Therefore, current therapeutic strategies rely upon
medications that improve symptoms, with the goal of allow-
ing the patient to continue functioning independently for
as long as possible. Treatment must be individualized to the
patient’s symptoms and stage of disease. Deciding which
drugs to use and when to use them remains one of the great-
est challenges of treating PD patients. Physicians typically
adjust medications and dosages over the course of a patient’s
disease as new symptoms develop and adverse effects of
drugs or loss of efficacy supervene.
    Because striatal (basal ganglia) dopamine deficiency
causes the main motor symptoms of PD, replacement of
dopamine with dopaminergic agents is the major pharma-
cologic strategy. Nondopaminergic agents such as anticho-

linergics, antiglutaminergics, and muscle relaxants are also
used to treat motor symptoms (Table 15–4).
1.  Levodopa—Levodopa is the most potent agent for the
symptomatic treatment of PD. In early, mild PD, it effec-
tively ameliorates the cardinal motor symptoms, leading to
the notion that clinical response to levodopa is diagnostic.
However, adverse effects, including the development of dys-
kinesias (involuntary movements) and motor fluctuations,

can limit its usefulness. After 5 years of levodopa therapy,
more than 50% of patients develop fluctuations, including
wearing off and sudden offs, and dyskinesia; these complica-
tions of treatment are thought to represent both pre- and
postsynaptic changes related to disease progression in the
setting of levodopa exposure. Theoretical concerns that
levodopa itself may be neurotoxic (eg, through free radical



Table 15–4.        Medications used in the treatment of
parkinson disease.

        Class                   Group                          Drug

 Dopaminergic          Dopamine precursor         Levodopa (with carbidopa)
     agent             Dopamine agonist           Bromocriptine, pramipexole,
                                                      ropinirole, amantadine,
                                                      apomorphine
                       COMT inhibitor             Entacapone, tolcapone
                       MAO-B inhibitor            Selegiline, rasagiline
 Nondopaminergic       Anticholinergic            Trihexyphenidyl, diphenhydr-
     agent                                            amine, amitriptyline
                       Antiglutaminergic          Amantadin
                       GABAergic drug             Lorazepam or clonazepam
 Atypical              Serotonin and dopamine     Quetiapine
     neuroleptic          antagonist
COMT = catecholamine O-methyl transferase; GABA = γ-aminobutyric
acid; MAO = monoamine oxidase.

Table 15–3.        Major parkinsonian syndromes.
 Primary Idiopathic Parkinsonism
 Parkinson disease (sporadic and familial)
 Secondary Parkinsonism
 Drug-induced (dopamine antagonists and depletors)
 Hydrocephalus (normal-pressure hydrocephalus)
 Trauma
 Tumor
 Vascular (multi-infarct state)
 Metabolic (hypoparathyroidism)
 Toxin (mercury, manganese, carbon monoxide, cyanide, MPTP)
 Infectious (postencephalitic)
 Hypoxia
 Atypical Parkinsonian Syndromes
 Progressive supranuclear palsy
 Corticobasal degeneration
 Multiple system atrophy:
 • Shy-Drager syndrome
 • Striatal nigral degeneration
 • Olivopontocerebellar atrophy
 Dementias
 Diffuse Lewy body disease
 Alzheimer disease
 Inherited Degenerative Diseases
 Wilson disease
 Huntington disease
 Neuroacanthocytosis
 Hallervorden-Spatz disease

MPTP = methylphenyltetrahydropyridine.

    Normal-pressure hydrocephalus                 causes a parkinsonian
gait disorder notable for short, shuffling, or magnetic steps
and loss of postural reflexes. These symptoms are accom-
panied by dementia and urinary incontinence that develop
over time. Imaging of the brain reveals grossly enlarged ven-
tricles. Diagnosis is confirmed by removal of CSF that results
in significant improvement of gait; cognitive dysfunction
and urinary incontinence are less likely to respond.
    Lower-body parkinsonism may also be caused by vascu-
lar disease. Vascular parkinsonism, a slowly progressive gait
disorder with freezing and loss of postural reflexes, results
from multiple lacunar infarcts that are easily seen on MRI.
Response to levodopa is not significant, and tremor is rare.
    Parkinsonism also occurs in diffuse Lewy body disease,
Alzheimer disease, Huntington disease, and Wilson disease.
Early, mild PD is commonly misdiagnosed as essential
tremor. Depression not only frequently complicates PD, but
when severe can mimic parkinsonism.

▶Treatment
A.   Pharmacotherapy
PD is a progressive neurodegenerative disease. No medica-
tion has been proven definitively to stop, slow, reverse, or
---
            204                                                  CHAPTER 15

than regular carbidopa-levodopa. Despite the theory that
controlled-release levodopa formulations should provide a
more constant level of bioavailable dopamine to the basal
ganglia, thus reducing the frequency of motor complica-
tions, studies have failed to show that initial therapy with
controlled-release formulations of levodopa decreased the
development of motor fluctuations. Supplemental carbidopa
can be prescribed as Lodosyn. In 2015, the FDA approved
an enteral suspension of carbidopa/levodopa (Duopa) that is
continuously infused into the jejunum and can be useful in
patients experiencing motor fluctuations because it provides
a continuous steady-state infusion of carbidopa-levodopa.
However, the technology is subject to complications such
as infection related to the catheter, tubing, and hardware.
    Adverse effects of levodopa therapy include anorexia,
nausea, vomiting, confusion, drowsiness, hypersomnolence,
vivid dreams, nightmares, hallucination, postural hypoten-
sion, and cardiac arrhythmias. The development of central
nervous system (CNS) adverse effects such as hallucina-
tions is often dose-related and may require reduction in the
dose of levodopa at the expense of worsening parkinsonian
symptoms.
2.  Dopamine agonists—After levodopa, the dopamine
agonists are the most powerful antiparkinson medications.

Dopamine agonists are synthetic compounds that stimulate
striatal dopamine receptors. Although initially used as add-
on therapy in patients receiving levodopa, the agonists are
also commonly used first-line as monotherapy in patients
with mild PD. Many neurologists do not prescribe dopamine
agonists for patients older than 70 years of age because these
patients are more likely to develop confusion, sleepiness,
and psychosis from these medications. Because levodopa
gives the greatest symptomatic benefit for the lowest risk
of adverse effects compared with other agents, levodopa
is often used as initial therapy in patients older than 70,
especially those with preexisting cognitive decline. However,
in patients with PD who are older than 70 but otherwise
mentally and physically younger than this age, therapy with
a dopamine agonist should be considered.
    Studies of dopamine agonists as primary monother-
apy in early PD show that drug-induced dyskinesias and
motor fluctuations occur infrequently in these patients
compared with those receiving levodopa monotherapy.
However, monotherapy with a dopamine agonist is rarely
sufficient for adequate symptomatic treatment after 3 years.
Initial treatment of mild PD with dopamine agonists may
give satisfactory reduction of PD symptoms while allowing
for a delay in the initiation of levodopa therapy. Starting
with a dopamine agonist also allows for a reduced dosages
of levodopa used in combination with dopamine agonists
when monotherapy with an agonist is no longer sufficient
for symptomatic control. These benefits need to be weighed
against its relative lesser potency and greater risk of certain
side effects compared with levodopa.
formation) have been debunked. Although levodopa has
been prescribed for more than 30 years, its long-term effect
on disease progression remains unknown.
    There remains a lack of consensus about when treatment
with levodopa should be initiated in patients with mild-
to-moderate parkinsonism. Because of the probability of
developing motor complications within the first 5 years of
starting levodopa, many neurologists do not use levodopa
as a first-line agent and prescribe less potent agents such
as MAO-B inhibitors, amantadine, and dopamine agonists,
often as monotherapy, in the mild stages of disease. Indica-
tions for starting levodopa include disabling symptoms and
signs such as postural instability and falling. Moderately
severe PD (ie, patients with bilateral motor symptoms and
some postural instability but who remain physically inde-
pendent) and a decline in the ability to carry out activities
of daily living may also be indications for starting levodopa
therapy. If patients are unable to tolerate dopamine agonists
or do not obtain significant symptomatic benefit from a
dopamine agonist in combination with nondopaminergic
agents, initiation of levodopa therapy should be considered.
Many patients older than 70 years of age and those with
cognitive decline often do not tolerate dopamine agonists or
nondopaminergic agents, and early use of levodopa should
be considered for these patients as well. Other neurologists
routinely use levodopa as first-line therapy even in early
PD, citing studies that show superior benefit on motor
symptoms and lower rates of discontinuation due to adverse
effects compared with levodopa-sparing strategies.
    Levodopa is converted to dopamine in the brain by
amino acid decarboxylase. Pharmaceutical levodopa is com-
bined with a peripheral dopamine decarboxylase inhibitor
such as carbidopa, which inhibits the peripheral conversion
of levodopa to dopamine and permits a greater amount of
levodopa to cross the blood–brain barrier. As a result, the
amount of levodopa that reaches the brain is greater, and
peripheral dopamine-induced side effects such as anorexia,
nausea, and vomiting.
    Carbidopa-levodopa is available in standard preparations
that contain a fixed ratio of each drug, 10 mg carbidopa
to 100 mg levodopa (10/100), 25 mg carbidopa to 100 mg
levodopa (25/100), and 25 mg carbidopa to 250 mg levodopa
(25/250). A controlled-release formulation is available in
ratios of 25 mg carbidopa to 100 mg levodopa (25/100) or
50 mg carbidopa to 200 mg levodopa (50/200). Treatment
is usually started by gradually increasing the dosage until
one tablet of carbidopa-levodopa 25/100 is taken three
times a day, preferably in the morning, early afternoon, and
early evening for maximum benefit. Taking the medication
with meals helps prevent gastrointestinal upset, although
protein intake may compete with levodopa transport in the
duodenum. The dosage can be gradually titrated to symp-
tomatic benefit. Long-acting controlled-release preparations
of carbidopa-levodopa (Sinemet CR) provide a slower onset
of effect, less bioavailability, and longer duration of effect
---
                                                                            MOvEMENT DISORDERS  205

contraindicated drugs include meperidine, tramadol, metha-
done, propoxyphene, dextromethorphan, and St. John’s
wort. One of the metabolites of selegiline is an amphetamine,
which may result in improved alertness but may also cause
insomnia. Other side effects include dyskinesias, tremor,
confusion, and psychosis.
b.  Amantadine—This              drug    exerts    its anti-PD     effects
through its mild dopaminergic (augmenting release and
possibly inhibiting reuptake), anticholinergic, and antiglu-
taminergic properties. Amantadine (Symmetrel) is effective
in both mild and advanced PD. In mild PD, amantadine
can reduce symptoms of PD, especially tremor. In advanced
PD, amantadine is a useful adjunct to therapy with levodopa
and dopamine agonists. It is also effective in decreasing
levodopa-induced dyskinesias. Side effects include periph-
eral edema, confusion, livedo reticularis, rash, and visual
hallucinations. The usual dosage is 100 mg twice a day;
doses up to 400 mg/day can be used. A long-acting form of
amantadine (Gocovri) was recently approved for treatment
of dyskinesia.

c.  Entacapone—This drug is used in conjunction with
levodopa to extend “on” time (duration of action of each
dose of levodopa) by inhibiting the enzymatic conversion of
levodopa to its metabolite. This results in increased synaptic
levels of dopamine. Side effects include diarrhea, dyskinesia,
and orange discoloration of urine. Entacapone (Comtan)
comes in a 200-mg tablet and is taken simultaneously with
levodopa. A formulation that contains 200 mg entacapone
and various dosages of levodopa (50 mg, 75 mg, 100 mg,
125 mg, 150 mg, 200 mg) with a proportionate amount of
carbidopa in one tablet is available as Stalevo.
d.  Tolcapone—Tolcapone has the same mechanism of
action and therapeutic effect as entacapone; however, tolcapone
can cause fulminant hepatitis resulting in death, and explosive
diarrhea. Although hepatitis is a rare adverse effect, patients
require baseline and biweekly liver transaminase profiles to
monitor hepatic function. Tolcapone should not be used except
when fluctuations are disabling and other drugs fail.
4.  Nondopaminergic agents—Anticholinergic drugs such
as trihexyphenidyl (Artane) and benztropine (Cogentin)
are mild anti-PD drugs used primarily as monotherapy or
in conjunction with dopaminergic medications in tremor-
predominant PD. Bradykinesia and rigidity may also be
minimally improved with anticholinergic therapy. Peripheral
and central side effects can be prominent, including confu-
sion, forgetfulness, blurred vision, constipation, dry mouth,
urinary retention, hallucinations, and psychosis. Such side
effects are especially problematic in older patients, and
therefore anticholinergic drugs are generally avoided in this
population. In such patients who might benefit from adjunc-
tive therapy with an anticholinergic, a weaker anticholiner-
gic such as diphenhydramine or amitriptyline can be used
instead of trihexyphenidyl.
     Dopamine agonists include the oral agents pramipexole
(Mirapex) and ropinirole (Requip), both of which are avail-
able in immediate-release and extended-release formula-
tions, and the transdermal patch rotigotine (Neupro). They
have been noted to cause sleep attacks (including when
driving) and impulse control disorders such as gambling
and shopping; other side effects include nausea, vomit-
ing, sleepiness, peripheral edema, orthostatic hypotension,
and psychotoxicity, including illusions, hallucinations, and
mania. These symptoms stop when the drug is decreased or
gradually stopped.
     All dopamine agonists should be started at very low
doses and increased gradually to reduce the risk of adverse
affects. Drug selection is often made based on ease of titra-
tion and clinician experience. Patients respond individually
to these medications, and if adverse effects develop from
one agonist, another can be tried. If a sufficient therapeutic
response is not attained with agonist monotherapy, other
agents such as amantadine, trihexyphenidyl, or an MAO-B
inhibitor can be added. If none of these medications is
tolerated or efficacious, treatment with levodopa may be
required.
     Apomorphine is a nonergot dopamine agonist that is
available for subcutaneous injection to rapidly treat sudden,
severe, disabling off periods. Dosing must be titrated slowly
and under the supervision of a physician. Side effects include
severe nausea, profound hypotension, dyskinesias, and hal-
lucinations. Because severe nausea and vomiting occur at
recommended doses of apomorphine, an antiemetic such as
trimethobenzamide must be used in conjunction with this
medication.
3.  Other dopaminergic agents
a.   Selegiline, rasagiline, safinamide—These drugs
are selective MAO-B inhibitors that increase dopamine by
impairing its metabolism via MAO-B. This mechanism of
action gives these agents their mild symptomatic effect.
There are some data suggesting possible neuroprotective
effects for selegiline and rasagiline, but these apparent effects
are questionable because of methodologic factors and, if
present, are small in magnitude.
     MAO-B inhibitors generally are well tolerated and can be
used as initial therapy in patients with very mild symptoms
or as add-on therapy. The dosing of selegiline (Eldepryl) is
5–10 mg every day. Dosing should not exceed 10 mg/day
because of risks associated with MAO enzyme inhibitors and
ingestion of foods containing tyramine. Dosing of rasagiline
(Azilect) is 0.5–1 mg once a day. Safinamide (Xadago) is
taken 50–100 mg daily.
     Coadministration with serotonergic agents, including
many antidepressants, may lead to serotonin syndrome. This
adverse interaction appears to be very uncommon but can
occur, especially when doses are high. Because depression is
so common in PD, cautious use of antidepressants with vigi-
lance for symptoms of serotonin syndrome is advised. Other
---
             206                                                    CHAPTER 15


Table 15–5.       Candidates for deep brain stimulation.
            Ideal Candidate                         Poor Candidate

 Typical Parkinson disease               Atypical parkinsonism: PSP, MSA,
                                            vascular parkinsonism
 Excellent response to individual doses  Poor or absent response to levodopa,
     of levodopa, even if short-lived       even in high dose

 Dopaminergic dyskinesias,               Postural instability, gait freezing
     “wearing off” motor fluctuations,
     or medication-refractory tremor
 Normal cognition                        Dementia, apathy, or severe depression
 Good general health                     Severe medical problems

 Excellent support network               Poor or absent support network
MSA = multiple system atrophy; PSP = progressive supranuclear
palsy.


DBS can also suppress a medication-refractory tremor in
PD. Medication dosages can often be lowered postsurgi-
cally, reducing dopamine-induced dyskinesias or other
side effects. With DBS, as opposed to stereotactic lesioning,
stimulators are usually implanted bilaterally with the benefit
of bilateral symptomatic improvement. DBS is reversible;
pulse generators may be turned off or electrodes can be
surgically removed without causing damage to brain tissue.
Recent data have shown that DBS is better than best medical
therapy in patients with moderately advanced symptoms,
and there is a tendency in the literature and clinical practice
to perform DBS surgery earlier in the course of the illness,
before the onset of gait imbalance, freezing, or dementia.
Proper patient selection by a neurologist with PD and DBS
expertise is critical. Realistic expectations of the benefits of
this surgical procedure are crucial for patients and families.
Surgery is not curative and does not alter the progression
of disease.
    In recent years, the DBS field has advanced through
refinements in battery technology and lead capability.


Table 15–6.       Parkinson disease symptoms that respond
to deep brain stimulation (DBS).

                                           Symptoms That Do Not Respond
    Symptoms That Respond to DBS                        to DBS
 Tremor                                  Gait freezing

 Rigidity                                Postural instability, frequent falls
 Bradykinesia                            Postural deformity, camptocormia

 Dystonia and dyskinesias                Hypophonia, tachyphemia
                                         Dementia, apathy

     Benzodiazepines, such as lorazepam, with moderately
long half-lives, used in small doses (0.5–1 mg twice a day),
can be useful in treatment of anxiety that can result from and
further complicate significant motor fluctuations.
     Hallucinations are a common side effect of dopaminer-
gic therapy and more prevalent with dopamine agonists
than with levodopa. The safest approach for patients expe-
riencing hallucinations and psychosis is to lower the dose
of dopaminergic therapy, but motor symptoms may not
permit a reduction in dose, in which case antipsychotic
medications that do not block dopamine receptors can
be tried. The most commonly used agent for treatment of
mild to moderate hallucinations is quetiapine (Seroquel).
Low-dose quetiapine (12.5–25 mg at bedtime) may also be
used to treat insomnia, which often occurs in patients with
PD. Pimavanserin (Nuplazid) is approved for treatment of
psychosis in PD. If these are not tolerated or are ineffective,
clozapine (Clozaril) is usually effective. However, the risk
of bone marrow suppression makes clozapine a difficult
medicine to use.

B.   Surgery
Neurosurgery for the symptoms and signs of PD has proven
effective and long-lasting. The application of stereotactic
lesion and stimulation techniques to PD, essential tremor,
and dystonia began serendipitously in 1952 with the inad-
vertent ligation of the anterior choroidal artery, which
supplies the medial lentiform nucleus and globus pallidus,
resulted in the abolition of tremor in a patient with PD. In
the decades following, and before the advent of levodopa,
neurosurgical lesioning procedures targeting the globus pal-
lidus, thalamic nuclei, and other parts of the basal ganglia
were used to improve the symptoms of PD.
     The development of          deep brain stimulation            (DBS) in
the late 1990s revolutionized the field of functional neu-
rosurgery and the treatment of advanced PD. Electrodes
implanted into the subthalamic nucleus or the globus
pallidus were found to provide relief of tremor, rigidity,
bradykinesia, Parkinson-associated dystonia, and levodopa-
induced dyskinesias. DBS proved especially advantageous to
the patient experiencing “wearing off” motor fluctuations
and dopaminergic dyskinesias, two complications of chronic
medication treatment that cannot be readily helped using
medication adjustment alone.
     Surgical candidates are patients with idiopathic PD who
are not demented or actively depressed and who respond,
however briefly, to individual doses of levodopa; such a
response is necessary in order to determine that a patient
does not have an atypical parkinsonian syndrome, such
as progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), multiple system
atrophy (MSA), or post-traumatic or vascular parkinson-
ism. See Table 15–5 for a description of candidates for
DBS. When successful, DBS results in reductions in “off”
time of motor fluctuations and in dyskinesias. (For a list
of symptoms of PD that respond to DBS, see Table 15–6.)
---
                                                                                           MOvEMENT DISORDERS                                                                     207

Further, a resurgence in stereotactic lesioning, using focused
ultrasound and gamma knife radiosurgery, has occurred.
Both techniques can accurately target the ventral intermedi-
ate (VIM) thalamus and ablate a disabling tremor, avoiding
the placement of brain electrode, and attendant hardware,
but these lesioning procedures can only be performed uni-
laterally and an off-target lesion will result in permanent
injury.

▶Prognosis
PD is a neurodegenerative disorder that worsens slowly over
years. The natural history of PD is influenced by the age at
onset of disease, lifestyle, and medical therapy. Although
there is no conclusive evidence that medical therapies slow
the progression of disease, morbidity and mortality rates
from PD have decreased with the use of levodopa. In addi-
tion to prolonging survival time, functional capacity and
quality of life are significantly improved by thoughtful treat-
ment with available medications.

 Schneider SA, Alcalay RN. Neuropathology of genetic synucle-
    inopathies with parkinsonism: Review of the literature.                Mov
    Disord 2017;32(11):1504–1523. [PMID: 29124790]
 Weaver FM, Follett F, Stern M. Bilateral deep brain stimulation vs
    best medical therapy for patients with advanced Parkinson Dis-
    ease: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2009;301(1):63–73.
 Xie CL, et al. Levodopa alone compared with levodopa-sparing
    therapy as initial treatment for Parkinson’s disease: A meta-
    analysis. Neurol Sci 2015;36:1319. [PMID: 25981231]

  ▼▼ATYPICAL PARKINSONIAN SYNDROMES

The atypical parkinsonian syndromes include progressive
supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, and multiple
system atrophy (Table 15–7). Early in their disease course,


▶General Considerations
PSP is categorized as an atypical parkinsonian syndrome
or Parkinson-plus syndrome. The prevalence of PSP is esti-
mated at 1.39 cases per 100,000 people. Similar to PD, PSP
occurs more frequently in men. The mean age of onset is
65 years.

▶Pathogenesis
The pathologic findings in PSP are distinctive for marked
neuronal degeneration and neurofibrillary tangles and tau-
positive astrocytes in basal ganglia and brainstem structures.
The neurofibrillary tangles found in PSP, which contain the
microtubule-associated protein tau, differ from those seen
in Alzheimer disease and other neurodegenerative disorders.
many patients are initially misdiagnosed with idiopathic
Parkinson disease (PD). A lack of response to levodopa,
early falls, early freezing (motor blocks), presence of cortical
or corticospinal abnormalities on examination, and involve-
ment of cranial nerve function distinguish these syndromes
from PD. Notably, these syndromes progress rapidly and are
difficult to treat.

PROGRESSIVE SUPRANUCLEAR PALSY

                 ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS

▶
    Progressive parkinsonism
▶   Vertical    supranuclear         ocular     palsy     or   slow    vertical
    saccades
▶   Early onset of falling
▶
    Axial rigidity
                    Table 15–7.        Atypical parkinsonian syndromes.
                                                                                                                                                 Neuroimaging Findings
                                   Syndrome                                      Parkinsonism Plus . . .                                    PET                              MRI
                     Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP)     Impaired downgaze, neck and axial rigidity, early loss of       Hypometabolic basal ganglia and     Midbrain atrophy
                                                                  postural reflexes                                               frontal cortex
                     Corticobasal degeneration (CBD)          Severe unilateral rigidity, alien limb phenomena, unilateral    Asymmetric cortical                 Asymmetric parietal lobe
                                                                  apraxia, unilateral cortical myoclonus, early dementia          hypometabolism                     atrophy
                     Multiple system atrophy (MSA)            Laryngeal stridor, increased deep tendon reflexes, dysarthria,  Hypometabolic basal ganglia and     Brainstem atrophy (in all
                     • Striatonigral degeneration                 absence of tremor                                               frontal lobes (seen in all MSA     MSA syndromes)
                     • Shy-Drager syndrome                    Early, symptomatic orthostatic hypotension; urinary or fecal        syndromes)
                     • Olivopontocerebellar atrophy               incontinence
                                                              Cerebellar dysmetria and dysarthria
                    MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; PET = positron emission tomography.
---
            208                                                CHAPTER 15

        Loss of striatal (basal ganglia) neurons and their postsyn-        ▶Prognosis
        aptic dopamine receptors explains the poor symptomatic             Symptoms are steadily progressive, and death, often due to
        response to levodopa and dopamine agonists.                        aspiration, usually occurs 5–10 years after onset of disease.

▶Clinical Findings
A.  Symptoms and Signs
The history is notable for early onset of falls, freezing, and
parkinsonism. Common examination findings early in the
course of disease include prominent axial rigidity, dystonic
retrocollis, and facial dystonia, giving patients an angry or
surprised look. Typical eye findings include supranuclear
ocular palsy, causing impairment of vertical gaze (more
commonly downgaze), and ocular square-wave jerks (small
horizontal saccades alternately to the left and right). Patients
may be unable to look downward voluntarily, yet reflex
ocular movements remain normal. Speech may be nasal,
dysarthric, and slow; phonation is dystonic, giving a raspy
growl. Gait is wide-based, and postural reflexes are absent.
As the disease progresses, dysarthria, dysphagia, and cog-
nitive impairment occur. Cognitive impairment is notable
for bradyphrenia, impaired verbal fluency, difficulty with
sequential tasks, impulsivity, poor judgment, and unaware-
ness of falling risk. Emotional lability, with inappropriate
weeping or laughing, may occur. In some patients with facial
dystonia, disabling blepharospasm may occur. Rest tremor
is distinctly uncommon, and there is no effective response
to levodopa.

B.  Imaging Studies
CT or MRI scans of patients with PSP may show brainstem
atrophy, particularly in the midbrain (giving rise to the
“hummingbird sign”), and generalized cerebral atrophy.
PET scanning with         18F-deoxyglucose shows hypometabo-
lism in the frontal cortex, and brainstem.

▶Differential Diagnosis
The major alternative diagnoses include PD, corticobasal
degeneration, multisystem atrophy, vascular parkinsonism,
and diffuse Lewy body disease.




































▶Differential Diagnosis
The main alternative diagnoses are PD and PSP. Frontotem-
poral dementia, PSP, and sometimes Alzheimer disease can
produce features resembling corticobasal degeneration, in
which case the term corticobasal syndrome is applied.
▶Treatment & Prognosis

No effective treatment exists. Levodopa and other dopami-
nergic drugs are rarely effective. Clonazepam may improve
myoclonus. Dystonia and rigidity may improve with botuli-
num toxin injections. Corticobasal degeneration progresses
CORTICOBASAL DEGENERATION

               ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS

▶  Parkinsonism
▶
   Unilateral arm rigidity and dystonia
▶  Cortical sensory deficits


▶Clinical Findings
A.   Symptoms and Signs

Patients with corticobasal degeneration often describe uni-
lateral hand clumsiness with corresponding limb rigidity
and bradykinesia. The onset is usually insidious, involv-
ing asymmetric parkinsonism, focal rigidity, and dystonia
involving one arm, and cortical sensory deficits. Cortical
sensory loss, apraxia, myoclonus, and alien limb phenom-
ena (insuppressible, involuntary movements) occur in the
affected limb. Patients may have coarse rest and action
tremor. Speech becomes notably slurred and labored, caus-
ing disturbances in communication and language. Early
features include falling and loss of postural reflexes. Other
findings include hyperreflexia and the Babinski sign. Later in
the course of the disease, both sides of the body are involved,
disturbances of ocular motility occur, and dementia often
develops.
B.   Imaging Studies
CT and MRI scans may show asymmetric parietal lobe
atrophy corresponding to the more affected side of the
brain. Asymmetric frontoparietal atrophy helps to differen-
tiate corticobasal degeneration from PSP. PET scans show
reduced     18F-fluorodopa uptake in the basal ganglia and
asymmetric cortical hypometabolism.
        ▶Treatment
        There is no specific treatment for PSP, and symptomatic
        improvement is difficult to obtain. Levodopa and other
        anti-PD medications should be tried but are rarely very
        effective. A combination of dextromethorphan/quinidine
        (Nuedexta) may help pseudobulbar affect (involuntary emo-
        tional expression disorder), and zolpidem (Ambien) has
        been reported to be beneficial for eye movements and motor
        function in PSP patients. Dystonia can be improved with
        botulinum toxin injections to affected muscles. Patients may
        opt for enteric feeding if dysphagia becomes severe.
---
                                                                                  MOvEMENT DISORDERS  209

more rapidly than PD, and mean survival is about 6 years
after onset of symptoms.

MULTIPLE SYSTEM ATROPHY

               ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
▶  Parkinsonism

▶  Symptomatic orthostatic hypotension
▶  Cerebellar ataxia
▶  Poor therapeutic response to levodopa


▶General Considerations

MSA encompasses distinct subtypes that have overlapping
clinical and prognostic features. These include the parkin-
sonian subtype (MSA-P, formerly striatonigral degenera-
tion), the autonomic subtype (MSA-A, formerly Shy-Drager
syndrome), and the cerebellar subtype (MSA-C, formerly
olivopontocerebellar atrophy). Ten percent of patients with
parkinsonian signs have MSA. In 100 patients with probable
MSA (14 confirmed at autopsy), the median age of onset was
53 years, with a range of 33–76 years; 67 patients were men,
and 33 were women.


























▶Prognosis
MSA (all three syndromes) progresses rapidly compared
with PD, and patients with prominent autonomic dysfunc-
tion have a worse prognosis. Many patients are wheelchair-
bound or markedly disabled within 5 years of diagnosis.
Mean survival rate in MSA is about 8–9 years after onset of
symptoms.


  ▼▼ESSENTIAL TREMOR


               ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS

▶  Action tremor of arms, head, and voice
▶  Family history of tremor (often)

▶  Absence of parkinsonism
▶  Transient improvement of tremor with alcohol ingestion


▶General Considerations
Essential tremor (ET) is a chronic, progressive neurologic
condition characterized by action tremors that affect the
hands as well as the legs, neck, and voice. The former
descriptor benign essential tremor is not appropriate, because
lateral margin of the putamen. The “hot cross bun sign,”
cross-shaped hyperintensity in the pons on T2 axial views,
may be present in MSA-C, representing degeneration of
pontocerebellar tracts. PET scan shows hypometabolism in
the striatum and cerebellum.
▶Treatment
Treatment is based on the approach used in PD. Dopaminergic
medications should be tried for symptomatic relief. A trial of
levodopa (up to 2 g/day, as tolerated, with carbidopa) should be
given to assess for levodopa responsiveness. Although patients
with MSA may initially respond to levodopa because of
preserved basal ganglia function, symptomatic benefits are
rarely sustained, and moderate or high doses of levodopa
may exacerbate preexisting orthostatic hypotension. In
patients with MSA-A, several methods are used to treat
symptomatic orthostatic hypotension. Initially, increasing
salt intake and wearing support hose may be beneficial.
Drugs such as midodrine (ProAmatine), fludrocortisone
(Florinef), or droxidopa (Northera) may eventually be
required if hypotension becomes disabling. Cerebellar symp-
toms in MCA-C may respond to amantadine 100 mg, up to
four times a day. Physical therapy with emphasis on balance,
gait, and range of motion is critical for optimizing mobil-
ity. The symptoms of MSA respond poorly to deep brain
stimulation.
                  ▶Clinical Findings
                  A.   Symptoms and Signs
                  Patients with MSA present with parkinsonism and addi-
                  tional characteristic clinical features. MSA-P is characterized
                  by parkinsonism without tremor. Other features include
                  dysarthria, dysphagia, laryngeal stridor, increased deep
                  tendon reflexes, anterocollis, and early postural instability.
                  Striatal neurons containing dopamine receptors are lost,
                  resulting in a characteristically poor response to levodopa.
                      MSA-A is characterized by parkinsonism and symptom-
                  atic, autonomic dysfunction. Orthostatic hypotension may
                  be severe, disabling, and difficult to treat. Other autonomic
                  symptoms such as bladder and bowel dysfunction and impo-
                  tence also occur. Brainstem, basal ganglia, preganglionic
                  sympathetic neuronal, and cerebellar degeneration occurs in
                  MSA. Occasionally, the basal ganglia are spared, accounting
                  for unpredictable levodopa responsiveness.
                      MSA-C is characterized by parkinsonism and cerebel-
                  lar symptoms. Degeneration of the pons, cerebellum, basal
                  ganglia, and substantia nigra is present. If the basal ganglia
                  are not severely degenerated, parkinsonism responds to
                  levodopa therapy.
                  B.  Imaging Studies

                  In MSA, T2-weighted MRI scans may show decreased signal
                  intensity in the putamen as well as slit-hyperintensity in the
---
             210                                                      CHAPTER 15

the symptoms advance over time, sometimes to the point
of disability. ET is more prevalent than PD or Alzheimer
disease, affecting up to 10% in those older than 65 years of
age. Onset is most common in persons in their early twen-
ties or in later adulthood, but ET may occur at any age. Both
sexes are equally affected. Most patients never seek medical
attention, because the tremor remains mild. The etiology of
ET is partly genetic. Many studies show that it is familial in
50–70% of patients, with autosomal dominant transmission.
The pathobiology of ET implicates a disorder of cerebellar
function.
▶Clinical Findings

A.   Symptoms and Signs
ET is characterized by a 4–10-Hz symmetric action tremor
of the arms. Action tremors includes postural tremors
(maintaining a posture against gravity) and kinetic trem-
ors (tremor that occurs with voluntary movement of the
affected limb). Ninety percent of patients have arm and hand
tremor, 30–50% have head tremor, 20% have voice tremor,
and approximately 12% have leg tremor. ET is described as
a monosymptomatic syndrome, yet up to 50% of patients
have very subtle cerebellar signs, such as impaired tandem
gait or mild ataxia. In more that 50% of patients, tremor can
be transiently diminished by ingestion of alcohol. Common
tasks affected by kinetic arm tremor include writing, drink-
ing out of a full cup, and eating soup with a spoon.




























Table 15–9.         Essential tremor versus parkinson disease:
clinical.

          Clinical
     Pathophysiology             Essential Tremor         Parkinsonian Tremor
 Age of onset                Bimodal: teens,             50 to 65 years
                                 middle life

 Progession                  May plateau for decades,    Progressive
                                 later progressive
 Symmetry                    Onset in both hands,        Unilateral onset,
                                 usually worse in           asymmetrical
                                 nondominant hand

 Spiral drawing              Large, tremulous,           Small eccentric
                                 concentric
 Alcohol response            Yes (50%)                   No
 Family history              Yes (50%)                   Less common

 Medication                  Propranolo, primidone,      Levodopa, anticholin-
                                 benzodiazepines,           ergics, amantadine,
                                 topiramate                 dopamine agonists
 Deep brain targets          Ventral intermediate        Subthalamic nucleus
                                 thalamus, zona          Globus pallidus interna
                                 incerta


Table 15–8.         Essential tremor versus parkinson disease:
phenomenology.
                                                                 Parkinsonian
      Phenomenology                 Essential Tremor                Tremor

 Rest tremor—arms            Rarely; implies coexisting PD    Yes
 Rest tremor—legs            No                               Yes

 Kinetic tremor              Yes                              Minimally
 Postural tremor             Tes                              Minimally
 Intention tremor            Yes                              No
     (dysmetria at target)
 Head tremor                 Yes                              No
 Face and lip tremor         No                               Yes

 Tongue tremor               No                               Yes

 Jaw tremor                  When mouth open or moving        When jaw is at rest
 Voice                       Tremulous                        Hypophonic,
                                                                  tachyphemic

 Postural instability        No                               Yes
 Ataxia; abnormal tandem     Frequent                         Rare

PD = Parkinson disease.

         ▶Differential Diagnosis
         ET is most frequently misdiagnosed as PD (Tables 15–8 and
         15–9). Distinguishing features of ET include the absence of
         rest tremor; the symmetric onset of action tremor; and lack
         of parkinsonian features such as bradykinesia, rigidity, or
         loss of postural reflexes. In patients with ET, handwriting is
         large and tremulous rather than the tremulous micrographia
         seen in those with parkinsonism. A proximal tremor that
         reappears with the arms held in wing position is prob-
         ably a reemergent PD tremor. ET patients have a fourfold
         increased risk of PD, resulting in the tremor-predominant
         condition essential tremor–Parkinson disease, or ET-PD.
             It can be often difficult to distinguish between mild ET
         and enhanced physiologic tremor [EPT]; ET is chronic and
         EPT is episodic, often situational, and provoked by a stressor.
         Patients with head tremors may have dystonia, especially if
         the head tremor is isolated, and the tremor exhibits dystonic
         features: directionality, a null point or the stabilizing sensory
         trick (“geste antagoniste.”) Cerebellar (intention) tremor
         can be differentiated from ET by the presence of cerebellar
         signs such as dysmetria and dysdiadochokinesis as well as by
         marked exaggeration of the tremor as the hand approaches
         the target (ie, with intention).
             The leading alternative diagnosis for ET is exaggerated
         physiologic tremor, an action tremor that resembles ET
         except that it is occurs under stressors (anxiety) with fatigue,
---
                                                                              MOvEMENT DISORDERS  211

 Higuchi Y, Matsude S, Serizawa T. Gamma knife radiosurgery in
    movement disorders: Indications and limitations. Mov Disord
    2017;32(1):28–35. [PMID: 27029223]
 Louis ED. Essential tremor: Evolving clinicopathological concepts
    in an era of intensive post-mortem enquiry.             Lancet Neurol
    2010;6:613–622. [PMID: 20451458]
 Zesiewcz TA, et al. Evidence-based guideline update: treatment
    of essential tremor: Report of the Quality Standards subcom-
    mittee of the American Academy of Neurology.                 Neurology
    2011;77(19):1752–1755.

   ▼▼DYSTONIA

                ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS


▶  Sustained muscle contractions, often causing twisting
   movements or abnormal postures
▶  Varies in age of onset, anatomic distribution
▶  Can be primary, or can be a feature of an underlying
   neurologic disorder or exogenous insult
▶  When secondary, frequently accompanied by other
   abnormal movements or neurologic signs



▶General Considerations
Dystonia is a movement disorder characterized by relatively
sustained and directional muscle contractions that produce
abnormal postures or twisting and repetitive movements.
The movements are usually longer in duration than those
seen in other movement disorders (eg, chorea or myoclo-
nus), involve the co-contraction of agonist and antagonist
muscles, and tend to be repetitive or patterned, consistently
involving the same muscle groups. A formal definition of
dystonia, originally coined by Oppenheimer in 1991, can
be paraphrased: Dystonia consists of sustained or intermit-
tent muscular contractions that are patterned and torsional,
resulting in abnormal twisting movements and postures.
Unlike the quick, random movements of chorea, or the
sudden shock-like movements of myoclonus, dystonia is
patterned, directional, and sustained at the peak of con-
traction. In     action dystonia, the dystonic movements are
elicited only with voluntary movement. When dystonia
is triggered only with particular actions, it is called                task-
specific dystonia; examples include writer’s cramp and the
embouchure dystonia of woodwind and brass musicians.
Activation of dystonic movements by actions in remote parts
of the body is called overflow; examples include leg dystonia
while writing or axial dystonia with talking. Dystonia that is
suppressed by voluntary activity is called paradoxical dystonia;
for example, talking or chewing may suppress dystonia
involving facial and oromandibular muscles (also known as
Meige syndrome).

Table 15–10.       Treatment of essential tremor.

      Drug              Initial Adult Dose          Usual Effective Dose
 Propranolol       20 mg/day                     80–240 mg/day

 Primidone         12.5–25 mg at bedtime         50–500 mg/day

 Topiramate        12.5–25 mg/day                100–400 mg/day
 Clonazepam        0.5 mg/day                    2–4 mg/day
 Gabapentin        100 mg                        1200–1800 mg/day

or due to medication or stimulants. Tremorogenic agents
include caffeine, methylphenidate, lithium, valproate, selec-
tive serotonin reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants,
β-adrenergic agonists, ephedrine, theophylline, corticoste-
roids, and tacrolimus. Hyperthyroidism can cause a sym-
metrical tremor that mimics ET. Action tremors occur in
neuropathy causing weakness.

▶Treatment
Propranolol, a β-blocker, and primidone, an anticonvulsant,
are the two first-line and most commonly used agents for
treatment of ET (Table 15–10). Side effects may limit toler-
ability and necessitate switching to an alternate medication.
Benzodiazepines (clonazepam, alprazolam) may be effica-
cious, perhaps by reducing the anxiety that exacerbates ET.
The anticonvulsant gabapentin has been used as adjunct
therapy in ET.
    Chemodenervation using botulinum toxin improves
limb tremor, head tremor, and voice tremor. Limitations of
botulinum toxin therapy include excessive weakness at the
site of injection and the short-lived nature of the response,
necessitating reinjection every 3–6 months, depending upon
the site.
    For tremors that are disabling and refractory to medica-
tion, deep brain stimulation targeting the VIM thalamus or
zona incerta or a stereotactic lesioning procedure may offer
the only effective therapy. DBS has an advantage over a thal-
amotomy using focused ultrasound or gamma knife because
lesioning procedures can only be performed unilaterally, and
an off-target lesion may cause permanent grain injury. The
lesioning procedures may be advantageous for patients who
cannot undergo implantation of a brain electrode.

 Bhatia KP, et al. Consensus statement on the classification
    of tremors from the task force on tremor of the Interna-
    tional Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society. Mov Disord
    2018;33(1):75–87. [PMID: 29193359]
 Elias WJ, et al. A pilot study of focused ultrasound thalamot-
    omy for essential tremor. N Engl J Med 2013;369(7):640–648.
    [PMID: 27959759]
 Haubenberger D, Hallett, M. Essential tremor. N Engl J Med
    2018;378:1802–1810. [PMID: 29742376]
---
              212                                                           CHAPTER 15

              Factors that tend to exacerbate dystonia include fatigue                           known to result from defined genetic mutations and rooted
         and     emotional         stress,    whereas        the    movements           usually  in pathology. The new dystonia classification is anchored
         decrease with relaxation or sleep. Many patients discover                               by two axes—axis I and axis II—as shown in Table 15–11.
         a tactile or proprioceptive sensory trick (geste antagoniste)                           Axis I combines all of the prior clinical descriptors into a
         that minimizes the dystonia; for example, a patient with                                framework encompassing age of onset, body distribution,
         cervical dystonia may touch the chin. Severe dystonia is less                           temporal pattern and associated clinical manifestations.
         likely to respond to these maneuvers, and joint contractures                                 Dystonia is subclassified by anatomic distribution, by age of
         can occur when dystonia is long-standing.                                               onset, and by etiology. In            focal dystonia, the abnormal move-
              The new classification of dystonia is the result of the                            ments involve a single body region, whereas segmental dystonia
         discovery of several causative genes, which has reduced                                 affects two or more contiguous body parts. When                           multifocal,
         the previous categories “primary,” “secondary,” and “idio-                              two or more noncontiguous body areas are involved.                              Hemi-
         pathic” into a wide grouping of dystonia syndromes now                                  dystonia     affects one side of the body and is suggestive of a


                                     Axis II
Pathology                           Evidence of degeneration (including iron
                                         or copper accumulation)
                                    Structural lesion (such as tumor, stroke,
                                         toxic exposure)

Inherited                           Autosomal dominant
                                    Autosomal recessive
                                    X-linked
                                    Mitochondrial











Acquired                            Brain injury
(due to a known specific cause)     Infection
                                    Drug, Toxin
                                    Hypoxia
                                    Vascular
                                    Paraneoplastic
                                    Brain accumulation of iron (NBIA: PKAN
                                         due to mutation in PANK 1 or PANK 2
                                         genes), neuroferritinopathy,
                                         aceruloplasminemia
                                    Wilson disease
Idiopathic                          Sporadic
                                    Familial (assumed genetic; mutation not
                                         yet detected)





Table 15–11.           New dystonia classification.
                                               Axis 1
  Clinical features        Age of onset             Infancy (0–2 years)
                                                    Childhood (3–12 years)
                                                    Adolescence (13–20 years)
                                                    Early adulthood (21–40 years)
                                                    Late adulthood (>40 years)
                           Body distribution        Focal (single body region):
                                                    Orbicularis oculi (blepharospasm)
                                                    Larnynx (spasmodic dysphonia)
                                                    Face (cranial)
                                                    Neck (cervical dystonia)
                                                    Arm/hand
                                                    Foot
                                                    Segmental:
                                                    Face and neck
                                                    Neck and arm
                                                    Multifocal
                                                    Generalized (usually involves trunk or
                                                        both legs)
                                                    Hemidystonia (usually caused by a focal
                                                        basal ganglia lesion)
                           Temporal pattern         By disease course:
                                                    Acute
                                                    Chronic or persistent
                                                    Static
                                                    Progressive
                                                    By variability:
                                                    Paroxysmal
                                                    Diurnal
                                                    Task-specific


                           Associated features      Isolated (formerly “primary”)
                                                    except for tremor Combined (formerly
                                                        “dystonia plus”)
                                                    Combined
                                                    Associated with:
                                                    • Other neurologic conditions
                                                    • Other movement disorders
                                                    • Other systemic manifestations
---
                                                                            MOvEMENT DISORDERS  213

     Most isolated (formerly “primary”) dystonias are focal
or segmental in distribution, with onset in adulthood.
About 10% of patients with isolated dystonia have general-
ized dystonia, usually starting in childhood or adolescence
(early-onset). DYT1, a major cause of early-onset dystonia,
results from mutation of the gene TOR1A located on the
long arm of chromosome 9 (9q34.1).                    TOR1A      codes for
torsinA, a heat-shock protein that binds ATP; in DYT1
dystonia, deletion of a GAG triplet from this gene results in
loss of a glutamic acid residue from torsinA. This deletion
is especially common in the Ashkenazi Jewish population,
where its prevalence is 1 in 2000 persons. It is inherited in
an autosomal dominant fashion, with reduced penetrance
of 30%. DYT1 dystonia (formerly called Oppenheim dysto-
nia or dystonia musculorum deformans) is now classified as
early-onset, generalized, persistent, isolated, inherited and
dominant disorder. It has a mean age at onset of 12.5 years
and begins in a limb in 94% of cases. It tends to progress
to generalized dystonia; as mentioned earlier, the prob-
ability of generalization is related to age and site of onset.
A less common early-onset inherited primary dystonia is
DYT6 dystonia due to heterozygous mutations in the gene
THAP1. THAP1 is a member of a family of cellular factors
that share a conserved THAP (thanatos-associated pro-
tein) DNA binding domain. Dystonia due to THAP1 often
involves the arms and axial muscles but differs from DYT1
in that speech is also frequently affected due to oroman-
dibular or laryngeal involvement. It may, however, mimic
DYT1. Other loci for primary dystonia include DYT7 (late-
onset autosomal dominant focal dystonia in a northwestern
German family and DYT17 (early-onset autosomal reces-
sive dystonia in a Lebanese sibship with segmental and gen-
eralized dystonia including dysphonia and dysarthria). The
most common genetic dystonia syndromes are presented in
Table 15–12.
     The dystonia-plus syndromes include dopa-responsive
dystonia, rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism, and myoclonus-
dystonia. Perhaps the most important to recognize is dopa-
responsive dystonia (DRD), or Segawa disease, as it is treated
very effectively with levodopa. Typically, gait dysfunction
(often appearing stiff-legged or spastic) begins in early or
mid-childhood, and symptoms are worst late in the day and
improve with sleep. Parkinsonism, including rigidity, bra-
dykinesia, flexed posture, and loss of postural reflexes, may
be prominent, making juvenile parkinsonism an important
differential diagnosis. DRD has also been misdiagnosed
as cerebral palsy. Girls are affected more often than boys.
Onset in adulthood is uncommon, and may present as focal
dystonia or parkinsonism. Most cases of DRD are caused
by heterozygous mutations in the GTP-cyclohydrolase I
(GCH1) gene located at 14q22.1 (DYT5); many different
mutations have been identified, making genetic testing
complex and expensive. The mutations impair the activity
of GTP-cyclohydrolase I, which catalyzes the rate-limiting
step in the synthesis of tetrahydrobiopterin, a necessary
cofactor for tyrosine hydroxylase; tyrosine hydroxylase in
secondary dystonia. Generalized dystonia involves the legs (or
one leg and the trunk) plus at least one other area of the body.
    Cervical dystonia is the most common of the focal dystonias.
Various combinations of neck muscles may be involved to
produce abnormal head positions, including horizontal turn-
ing (torticollis), tilting (laterocollis), flexion (anterocollis), or
extension (retrocollis). Repetitive jerking of the head may
resemble tremor, but can usually be distinguished by its
directional preponderance. Approximately 75% of patients
complain of neck pain. Less common than cervical dystonia
are the focal dystonias that involve cranial muscles. Blepha-
rospasm    causes contraction of the orbicularis oculi; mild
cases are characterized by increased blink rate with flurries of
blinking, whereas more severely affected patients have visual
impairment due to sustained forceful eye closure. Spasmodic
dysphonia results from dystonia of the vocal cords; abnor-
mal adduction, which causes a strained, strangled voice, is
more common than abduction, in which the voice sounds
whispering and breathy. In oromandibular dystonia there is
abnormal activity in lower facial, tongue, jaw, and pharyn-
geal muscles that may interfere with speaking or swallowing.
Brachial dystonia       is a form of focal dystonia that may be
primarily, or only, present with writing (writer’s cramp); it is
probably more common than is usually recognized. In about
15% of patients, there is spread from the dominant to the
contralateral arm, at which point it is considered segmental
bibrachial dystonia. Other segmental dystonias involve the
cranial muscles (eg, Meige syndrome), sometimes in combi-
nation with neck muscles (cranial-cervical dystonia).
    Age at onset is an important prognostic consideration,
because patients with onset of dystonia in childhood or ado-
lescence are likely to progress to generalized or multifocal dys-
tonia, especially when the dystonia initially involves the leg.
    Classification of a patient’s dystonia by etiology is useful
for prognosis, for guiding therapy, and for genetic counsel-
ing. In isolated dystonia, which may be familial or sporadic,
no associated neurologic abnormalities (eg, dementia, ocu-
lar abnormalities, ataxia, spasticity, or paresis) are present.
(An exception is tremor, which is common in patients with
primary dystonia, especially cervical dystonia.) Isolated dys-
tonia is distinguished from the combined dystonias (formerly
“secondary” dystonia or “dystonia plus” or “symptomatic”
dystonia) by the absence of signs other than dystonia as well
as by the absence of an identified exogenous cause or brain
degeneration. The combined dystonias include (1) the inher-
ited dystonia-plus syndromes, which are similar to primary
dystonia in that there is no evidence of brain degeneration,
but signs other than dystonia are present (specifically myoc-
lonus and parkinsonism); (2) inherited neurologic conditions
associated with neuronal degeneration (eg, Huntington dis-
ease, Wilson disease, the spinocerebellar ataxias); (3) dystonia
associated with PD and other parkinsonisms; and (4) dystonia
due to environmental causes (eg, exposure to neuroleptics,
stroke). Finally, dystonia may occur as a feature of other
movement disorders, such as tic disorders and paroxysmal
dyskinesias.
---
              214                                                         CHAPTER 15

Table 15–12.          Most common genetic dystonia syndromes.
   Nomenclature            Inheritance              Locus                           Gene Product
 DYT1                    AD                   9q34.11              TOR1A, torsinA



 DYT3                    XR                   Xq13.1               TAF1
 DYT4                    AD                   19.p13.3             TUBB4a, β-tubilin 4a
 DTY5a                   AD                   14q22.2              GTP cyclohydrolase 1 [GCH-1]
 DYT5b                   AR                   11p15.5              Tyrosine hydroxylase [TH]
 DYT6                    AD                   8p11.21              THAP1

 DYT7                    AD                   18p                  Unknown
 DYT8                    AD                   2q35                 PNKD protein (formerly myofibillogenesis
                                                                       regulator)
 DYT11                   AD                   7q21.3               Epilsilon sarcoglycan [SGCE]

 DYT12                   AD                   19.q13.2             Na+/K+-ATPase alpha 3 subunit [ATP1A3]
 DYT17                   AR                   20p11.2-q13          Unknown
 DYT18                   AD                   1p34.2               SLC2A1, glucose transporter 1 [GLUT1]
 DYT19                   AD                   16q13-21             Unknown

 DYT20                   AD                   2q31                 Unknown
 DYT23                   AD                   9q34.11              CDKN1A-interacting zinc finger protein 1
                                                                       [CIZ1]
 DYT24                   AD                   11p14.2              Anoctamin 3 [ANO3]
 DYT25                   AD                   18p11.21             Guanine nucleotide-binding protein
                                                                       alpha-activating [GNAL]

         AD = autosomal dominant; AR = autosomal recessive.


                         Phenotype
Original “classic” Openheim phenotype, childhood-onset
    monosymptomatic disorder, usually begins in the limb,
    with generalization, prevalence in Ashkenazi Jews,
    30% penetrance
“Lubag” X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism, Filipino
Generalized dystonia with spasmodic dysphonia
Classic dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD; Segawa disease)
DRD, infantile parkinsonism
Mixed dystonia (neck, limbs, generalized); often with
    dysphonia, mennonites
Adult-onset cervical dystonia
Paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia [Mount-Reback
    type]
Myoclonic dystonia; tremors, myoclonus (parkinsonism,
    alcohol-responsive, juvenile-onset)
Rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism
Juvenile-onset torticollis, segmental and generalized spread
Paroxysmal exertional dyskinesia [PED]
Paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia [EKD2] but without
    epilepsy
Paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia [PNKD2]
Cervical dystonia

Cervical-brachial-cranial dystonia, jerky torticollis
Craniocervical dystonia

         turn converts tyrosine to levodopa. Inheritance is autosomal                                  heterozygous mutations in GCH1, in genes for other enzymes
         dominant with reduced penetrance that appears to be sex-                                      involved in pterin metabolism, and in genes encoding tyro-
         influenced (ie, higher in girls). Although the dystonia may                                   sine hydroxylase. Patients with these defects are often more
         improve dramatically with anticholinergic medications such                                    severely affected clinically, and features due to deficiency of
         as trihexyphenidyl, a trial of oral levodopa therapy at low                                   norepinephrine and serotonin may predominate.
         doses (usually no more than 300–400 mg daily) is useful for                                        Myoclonus-dystonia             (DYT11) is a combined dystonia
         diagnosis as well as for treatment. Additional support for the                                syndrome with prominent myoclonic jerks, usually affect-
         diagnosis can be obtained from a phenylalanine-loading test,                                  ing the arms and trunk more than the legs. Inheritance is
         in which blood levels of phenylalanine remain elevated for a                                  autosomal dominant, and many patients have a mutation in
         prolonged period, because of the role of tetrahydrobiopterin                                  the epsilon-sarcoglycan (SGCE) gene on chromosome 7q21.
         as a cofactor for phenylalanine hydroxylase as well as tyro-                                  Onset is usually in childhood or adolescence. The symptoms
         sine hydroxylase. Measurement of biopterin metabolites in                                     characteristically respond to alcohol, and alcoholism (as well
         cerebrospinal fluid may also aid in diagnosis.                                                as other psychiatric disorders) is not uncommon.
              In addition to classic DRD due to heterozygous                           GCH1                 Another rare dystonia combined syndrome is                         rapid-
         mutations, DRD may result from homozygous or compound                                         onset dystonia-parkinsonism                (DYT 12), in which dystonia
---
                                                                  MOvEMENT DISORDERS  215

    Rarer heredodegenerative causes of dystonia include
other autosomal-recessive inborn errors of metabolism,
such as Niemann-Pick type C, neuronal ceroid lipofuscino-

sis, GM1 and GM2 gangliosidoses, glutaric academia, and
methylmalonic aciduria. Formerly called Hallervorden-Spatz
disease,   pantothenate kinase–associated neurodegeneration
(PKAN) is an autosomal recessive disease resulting in abnor-
mal deposition of iron in the basal ganglia, producing child-
hood onset of dystonia, spasticity, seizures, and dementia.
Other inherited causes of dystonia (often accompanied by
parkinsonism and other neurologic signs) that are associ-
ated with neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
include PLA2G6 (PARK14)-associated neurodegeneration,
neuroferritinopathy, and Kufor-Rakeb disease (PARK9). Lubag
(DYT3) is an X-linked recessive dystonia-parkinsonism affect-
ing male Filipinos. Usual onset is in adulthood, with cranial or
generalized dystonia; parkinsonism may co-occur or develop
later. The course tends to be progressive. The deafness-dystonia
(Mohr-Tranebjaerg) syndrome is an X-linked recessive con-
dition with mutation in the DDP1 gene. The spinocerebellar
ataxias (especially SCA3 [Machado-Joseph disease], SCA2,
and SCA17) can be associated with dystonia, as can dentato-
rubropallidoluysian atrophy.

▶Pathoanatomy

Many cases of secondary dystonia are associated with lesions
of the basal ganglia (especially the putamen), or with their
connections. Degenerative brain changes are not reported
in primary dystonia, but relatively few brains have been
studied. One study described neuronal inclusions in the
brainstem of DYT1 cases. Increased copper deposition in
the basal ganglia of adult-onset focal dystonia has been
described. Functional imaging of DYT1 patients with PET
demonstrates altered metabolism in neural circuits involving
the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, thalamus, and cerebellum.

▶Prevention
No intervention is known to prevent the development of

dystonia. Genetic counseling is useful in educating patients
about the likelihood of transmitting the condition to succes-
sive generations.


▶Clinical Findings
A.   Laboratory Findings
Like most movement disorders, the diagnosis of dystonia
is made on clinical grounds rather than on the basis of
laboratory testing. Nevertheless, the cause of the dystonia
sometimes can be elucidated through further investigations.
The primary and dystonia-plus dystonias for which genetic
testing is currently commercially available are DYT1, DYT6,
DRD, and myoclonus-dystonia. A positive result obviates
the need for further diagnostic testing. Genetic counseling
must be available for patients undergoing this test.
and parkinsonism begin suddenly in adolescence or early
adulthood and progress over hours to weeks, after which the
symptoms usually stabilize. Inheritance is autosomal domi-
nant and maps to 19q13. The responsible gene codes for the
A3 catalytic subunit of the Na+/K+-ATPase pump.

    Although the causes of combined dystonia are numerous,
and increasing, patients with isolated dystonia significantly
outnumber the secondary cases. Nevertheless, it is important
to identify patients with combined dystonia, as treatment
of the underlying condition may be warranted. Factors that
raise the likelihood that dystonia is acquired from a specific
medical or neurologic cause include history of a potentially
etiologic factor (eg, perinatal injury, stroke, encephalitis,
head trauma or peripheral trauma, brain tumor, exposure to
neurotoxic agents); abnormalities in the neurologic exami-
nation (including hemidystonia), neuroimaging, or labora-
tory evaluation; onset of dystonia at rest rather than action;
early onset of cranial dystonia or late onset of leg dystonia;
and evidence that the dystonia is psychogenic.
    One cause of acquired dystonia is exposure to drugs that
block dopamine receptors; neuroleptic agents used in psychi-
atric practice and the antiemetics are most frequently respon-
sible. Dystonia may occur soon after initiation of therapy
(acute dystonic reaction) or after prolonged treatment (tardive
dystonia). These are discussed in more detail in the section on
drug-induced movement disorders. Exogenous causes also
include injury to the CNS (especially the basal ganglia, cere-
bellum, and thalamus) or peripheral nervous system; dystonia
can be a feature of complex regional pain syndrome. It is also
relatively common for dystonia to emerge through psycho-
genic mechanisms; features that suggest a nonorganic etiology
include movements that vary over time, disappearance with
distraction, give-way weakness, and sensory findings that do
not conform to a physiologically plausible pattern.
    Inherited degenerative diseases that can cause dystonia
include many autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive
conditions, X-linked dominant and recessive conditions, and
mitochondrial defects. As mentioned previously, these dis-
eases usually do not cause pure dystonia. Wilson disease is an
important consideration, because it requires early treatment. It
results from mutations in the ATP7B gene on chromosome 13,
which produce a defect in copper metabolism, leading to the
insidious development of neurologic, psychiatric, or hepatic
dysfunction. Inheritance is autosomal recessive; more than
200 different mutations have been reported, making genetic
testing impractical. When onset is in childhood, Wilson
disease usually presents with hepatic dysfunction, but neu-
rologic presentation is most typical in adult-onset disease.
Dystonia can be generalized, segmental, or multifocal, but
cranial involvement is characteristic; Wilson’s original 1912
monograph highlighted the typical “sardonic” smile. Other
common neurologic abnormalities include tremor (classi-
cally “wing-beating”), dysarthria, dysphagia, drooling, ataxia,
and dementia. In addition to brain and liver (cirrhosis, acute
hepatitis) involvement, systemic findings can involve the
eyes, heart, kidneys, bones, joints, glands, and muscles.
---
             216                                                   CHAPTER 15

hyperintensity (the “eye-of-the-tiger sign”). PET scanning
may be supportive of primary dystonia, but rarely is crucial
in making the diagnosis.

▶Differential Diagnosis

A variety of central and peripheral nervous systems disorders,
as well as non-neurologic conditions, can be associated with
abnormal postures that resemble torsion dystonia (sometimes
called   pseudodystonia). For example, tonic seizure activity
can produce sustained twisting movements. Head tilt can
reflect palsy of the trochlear nerve, vestibulopathy, pathology
in the posterior fossa, or a retropharyngeal soft tissue mass. Stiff
person syndrome causes contraction of axial and proximal limb
muscles. Nerve and muscle abnormalities include neuromyo-
tonia (Isaac syndrome), the myotonic disorders, inflammatory
myopathies, and glycogen storage diseases (eg,                     Satoyoshi
disease). Carpopedal spasms of tetany can be the manifestation
of hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, or alkalosis. Orthopedic
and rheumatologic processes involving bones, ligaments, or
joints can result in abnormal postures. In Sandifer syndrome,
patients (typically young boys) with hiatal hernia develop head
tilt in association with gastroesophageal reflux.

▶Complications

Long-standing torsion dystonia can result in fixed contrac-
tures or scoliosis. Dystonic storm or status dystonicus is a
rare but life-threatening disorder that may occur in primary
or secondary dystonia, especially in children or adolescents
with underlying generalized dystonia. Severe repeated dys-
tonic spasms may interfere with respirations and cause
hyperpyrexia, dehydration, and acute renal failure secondary
to rhabdomyolysis; it requires aggressive treatment that may
include emergent deep brain stimulation.

▶Treatment
When dystonia is secondary, treatment of the underlying con-
dition may produce improvement in the dystonia. In patients
with tardive dystonia or an acute dystonic reaction, dopamine
receptor–blocking drugs should be eliminated or replaced
whenever possible (as detailed in section on drug-induced
movement disorders). Structural lesions may be amenable to
surgical correction. Management of Wilson disease consists
of copper chelation therapy (usually with penicillamine as a
first-line agent) and oral zinc, which induces copper-binding
metallothionein in enterocytes. Some of the inborn errors
of metabolism may respond to dietary restriction or supple-
mentation. Patients with DRD usually are maintained on
low-dose carbidopa/levodopa therapy. Although currently
there is no curative therapy for primary dystonia, several
effective options for symptomatic treatment are available;
these include oral pharmacologic agents, chemodenerva-
tion, and surgery. Of the various oral medications that have
been studied, anticholinergic agents are the most efficacious
     Genetic testing for DYT1 dystonia is indicated for patients
with onset of dystonia before 26 years of age, as well as for
patients with later onset who have a relative with early-onset
dystonia. Data to guide DYT6 testing are insufficient at pres-
ent. Most patients with clinically typical DRD have identified
mutations in GCH1 if comprehensive analysis is performed,
including testing for deletions. There is genetic testing for
myoclonus-dystonia, although many sporadic cases do not
harbor SGCE mutations. Genetic testing is also available for
many of the secondary dystonias, including SCAs and PKAN.
An excellent resource for genetic counseling and testing
information is www.genetests.org, a publicly funded resource.
     If genetic testing is negative or is not indicated, much of
the remaining work-up is directed toward identifying a sec-
ondary cause for the patient’s dystonia. Treatable conditions
that should always be considered in the differential diagnosis
include DRD and Wilson disease. We offer a trial of carbi-
dopa/levodopa to all non-DYT1 patients with early onset of
symptoms as well as to late-onset patients with features sug-
gesting DRD (ie, parkinsonism, diurnal variation). The dose
is increased as tolerated over several weeks; although a daily
dose of 600 mg levodopa is sometimes required, failure to
respond to a dose of 300 mg/day usually excludes the diag-
nosis of DRD. Wilson disease should be excluded in patients
with onset of dystonia before age 50. Diagnostic laboratory
findings in patients with neurologic signs due to Wilson dis-
ease include MRI abnormalities involving the putamen, thala-
mus, and brainstem; reduced serum ceruloplasmin; increased
24-hour urinary copper excretion; and Kayser-Fleischer rings
in the cornea due to deposition of copper in Descemet
membrane. These are best seen with slit lamp examination.
Although noninvasive studies are usually adequate for diag-
nosing neurologic Wilson disease, liver biopsy to assess cop-
per content has high sensitivity and may be considered.
     Evaluation of secondary dystonia is dictated by clues pro-
vided by the history and examination. Routine blood tests such
as complete blood count, electrolytes, glucose, calcium, magne-
sium, coagulation profile, and kidney, liver, and thyroid func-
tion may be supplemented by sedimentation rate, antinuclear
antibody screen, and syphilis screen. Specific clinical findings
or laboratory abnormalities may dictate further investigations,
including electrophysiologic studies, lumbar puncture, biopsy
of various tissues, or metabolic studies of blood, urine, or
cerebrospinal fluid. Testing for the human immunodeficiency
virus should be considered in the appropriate setting.
B.   Imaging Studies

All patients suspected of having a secondary form of dystonia
should undergo MRI (or, if not possible, CT) of the brain. In
primary dystonia and in the dystonia-plus syndromes, brain
MRI is normal. In secondary and heredodegenerative dysto-
nias, MRI may show calcification, necrosis, or other abnor-
malities in the basal ganglia. In some cases, these changes
are quite specific; for instance, T2-weighted MRI in PKAN
often shows hypointensity in the globus pallidus with medial
---
                                                                                       MOvEMENT DISORDERS       217

dyskinesias and dystonia in Parkinson disease and neuro-
physiologic studies that demonstrate an abnormal pattern
of neuronal discharging from the globus pallidus in patients
with generalized dystonia, current surgical interventions
target this region of the basal ganglia. Although either palli-
dotomy or DBS can modulate the pallidal output, DBS has
the advantages over ablative surgery of being reversible and
having multiple stimulator parameters that can be adjusted
noninvasively to optimize the outcome in a particular
patient. DBS has been performed in patients with primary
generalized dystonia, secondary generalized dystonia, cervi-
cal dystonia, blepharospasm, Meige syndrome, and tardive
dystonia. In a 2006 meta-analysis of 24 studies including
137 patients who underwent DBS for dystonia, the great-
est improvement was seen in patients with PKAN, DYT1
dystonia, and tardive dystonia. Surgical denervation proce-
dures such as ramisectomy and rhizotomy as well as myec-
tomy may be useful in selected cases of cervical dystonia.Because patients with dystonia often have associated
comorbidities, consultation with specialists including ortho-
pedic surgeons, physiatrists, and psychiatrists can be useful.
Many patients derive benefit from physical, occupational,
and speech therapy. Various devices have been developed
that provide sensory input via the affected body part,
simulating a sensory trick. Alternative and complementary
modalities such as acupuncture, biofeedback, massage, and
relaxation techniques may be helpful.

 Albanese A, et al. Phenomenology and classification of dystonia:
     A consensus update. Mov Disord 2013;28(7):863–873. [PMID:
     23649720]
 Lohmann K, Klein C. Update on the genetics of dystonia. Curr
     Neurol Neurosci Rep 2017;17(3):26. [PMID: 28283962]
 Schwarz CS, Bressman SB. Genetics and treatment of dystonia.
     Neurol Clin 2009;27:697–718. [PMID: 19555827]
 Shanker V, Bressman SB. Diagnosis and management of dystonia.
     Continuum (Minneap Minn) 2016;22(4 Movement Disorders):
     1227–1245. [PMID: 27495206]


   ▼▼MYOCLONUS


                ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS

▶
    Brief, sudden, shock-like, involuntary muscle contractions

▶General Considerations

Myoclonus means “a quick movement of muscle.” Myo-
clonic jerks are shock-like, involuntary muscle contractions
that may be rhythmic and repetitive or random and unpre-
dictable. The jerks may be focal, segmental, or generalized.
Myoclonic jerks are often stimulus-sensitive and induced by
sudden noise or movement. Positive myoclonus, a sudden,

Table 15–13.        Oral medications used in management of
dystonia.
                                           Usual Effective Dose (mg/day)

 Anticholinergic agents
    Trihexyphenidyl                     6–80
    Benztropine                         4–8
    Ethopropazinea                      100–400
 Benzodiazepines
    Clonazepam                          1–4
    Diazepam                            10–60
    Lorazepam                           1–6
 Dopamine-depleting agents
    Tetrabenazine                       50–200
    Reserpine                           1–3
 GABA agonist
    Baclofen                            30–80
aGABA = γ-amino butyric acid.
 Not available in the United States.


(Table 15–13). Trihexyphenidyl is the best studied and prob-
ably the most widely used, although benztropine, diphen-
hydramine, and ethopropazine (which is not available in the
United States) may be useful as well. Use is often limited by
peripheral anticholinergic adverse effects, including blurred
vision, dry mouth, urinary retention, sedation, and confusion,
and doses should be titrated slowly. Pilocarpine eye drops or
oral pyridostigmine, a peripherally acting anticholinesterase,
may be effective in counteracting these unwanted effects.
Anticholinergic medications can be used singly or in combi-
nation with other drugs, including baclofen, benzodiazepines,
and muscle relaxants such as cyclobenzaprine. Dopamine-
depleting agents and atypical antipsychotics may be helpful in
the treatment of dystonia. Preliminary observations suggest
that newer antiepileptic drugs (eg, zonisamide, topiramate,
levetiracetam) may be useful in suppressing dystonic move-
ments, but further study of their role is needed.
    Chemodenervation of overactive muscles by injection of
botulinum toxin is the treatment of choice for focal dystonia.
The toxin produces muscle weakness by interfering with pro-
teins in the presynaptic nerve terminal that are responsible
for release of acetylcholine into the neuromuscular junction.
This therapy is effective in the treatment of blepharospasm,
cervical dystonia, spasmodic dysphonia, writer’s cramp, and
oromandibular dystonia. Side effects can arise from unin-
tended weakness in nearby muscles due to diffusion of toxin.
Antibodies to botulinum toxin can develop with repeated
injections, resulting in loss of therapeutic effect.
    Patients whose dystonia is disabling and refractory to
oral medications and chemodenervation may be candidates
for surgery of the peripheral or CNS. Thalamotomy, pio-
neered in the 1960s, is the oldest CNS surgical approach to
dystonia. Based on the efficacy of pallidotomy for treating
---
             218                                                    CHAPTER 15

may occur in primary generalized epilepsy, multiple sclerosis,
encephalitis, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, Alzheimer disease,
degenerative disease, toxic states, and metabolic encephalopa-
thies. Two types of myoclonus originate from the spinal cord.
Spinal segmental myoclonus is typically rhythmic, stimulus-
sensitive, and restricted to a few adjacent segments of the
spinal cord. Propriospinal myoclonus causes slow, generalized
truncal jerks that produce truncal flexion, and in a subset of
patients the etiology is psychogenic. Myoclonus can result
from a peripheral nerve lesion. Movements are limited to the
involved motor unit, usually are not sensitive to stimuli, and
are irregular. An example is hemifacial spasm caused by a
lesion to the facial nerve.
B.    Imaging Studies and Other Tests
Electroencephalography (EEG) may be useful to clarify an
epileptic syndrome, but cortical myoclonus does not produce
abnormalities on routine EEG. Definitive localization of a
cortical myoclonic focus requires time-locked, back-averaged
EEG, a highly specialized technique. In cortical myoclonus,
somatosensory evoked potentials may show large-amplitude
potentials. CT or MRI may reveal a focal, causal lesion.

▶Treatment

Therapy of myoclonus is empiric, and for best results, anti-
myoclonic agents are used in combination (Table 15–14).
Choice of therapeutic agents is based on diagnosis, origin of


 Table 15–14.        Treatment of myoclonus.
                   Initial Adult
       Drug            Dose        Usual Effective Dose        Indication

  Clonazepam       0.5 mg/day     2 mg/day divided        Posthypoxic
                                      3 times a day          myoclonus
                                                          Spinal myoclonus
                                                          Progressive
                                                             myoclonic epilepsy
                                                          Essential myoclonus
  Levetiracetam    250 mg/day     1000–1500 mg/day        Posthypoxic
                                                             myoclonus
                                                          Cortical myoclonus
                                                          Spinal myoclonus
  Piracetam        400 mg         1200–16,000 mg/day      Posthypoxic
                      3 times         divided 3 times        myoclonus
                      a day           a day               Cortical myoclonus
                                                          Progressive myoclonic
                                                             epilepsy
                                                          Essential myoclonus
  Primidonea       25 mg/day      500–750 mg/day          Cortical myoclonus
  Valproate        125 mg         750–1000 mg/day         Most forms of
                      2 times         divided 2 times        myoclonus
                      a day           a day
 aNot approved by the Food and Drug Administration.

brief muscle jerk, is caused by active muscle contraction.
Negative myoclonus (ie, asterixis) is a sudden, brief, cessa-
tion of muscle contraction in actively contracting muscles
that results in loss of posture followed by a compensatory
contraction. Myoclonus may be difficult to distinguish from
other hyperkinetic involuntary movements, especially tics
and tremor. Unlike tics, myoclonus cannot be suppressed,
and it does not wax and wane. In addition, myoclonus usu-
ally produces a faster movement than a tic. Tremor is usually
slower than myoclonus and is rhythmic and oscillatory.

▶Classification
Etiologic classification of myoclonus includes physiologic,
essential,     epileptic,    and    symptomatic         forms.     Normally
occurring muscle jerks such as hiccups (myoclonus of the
diaphragm) and hypnic jerks are termed physiologic myoc-
lonus. Essential myoclonus is a rare disorder that may be
hereditary (autosomal dominant), sporadic, or of unknown
cause. An important inherited cause of myoclonus that usu-
ally starts in childhood and is commonly accompanied by
dystonia is myoclonus-dystonia due to mutations in epsilon–
sarcoglycan (DYT11); the syndrome is discussed earlier in
the section on dystonia. Myoclonus that occurs in the set-
ting of underlying epilepsy is termed                epileptic myoclonus.
Examples include epilepsia partialis continua and juvenile
myoclonic epilepsy. Progressive myoclonic epilepsy includes
a group of degenerative disorders characterized by epilepsy,
myoclonus, and progressive neurologic deterioration. Exam-
ples of progressive myoclonic epilepsies include neuronal
ceroid lipofuscinosis, Lafora body disease, Unverricht-
Lundborg disease, myoclonus with epilepsy and ragged-red
fibers (MERFF), and mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic
acidosis, and stroke-like episodes (MELAS).                    Symptomatic
myoclonus may occur in the setting of renal and liver failure,
drug intoxication, anoxic brain injury (posthypoxic myoclonus),
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, Huntington disease, Alzheimer
disease, and parkinsonism.
     Myoclonus may originate from the cerebral cortex,
subcortical structures, brainstem, spinal cord, or peripheral
nerves. Choice of antimyoclonic therapy is guided by the
origin of the myoclonus. Definitive localization of the focus
of myoclonus requires complex electrophysiologic studies
that are not routinely available.

▶Clinical Findings

A.   Symptoms and Signs
Cortical myoclonus manifests as stimulus-sensitive, spontane-
ous, arrhythmic muscle jerks, often restricted to a body part
such as the arm, leg, or face. Cortical myoclonic jerks originate
within the sensorimotor cortex and may be manifestations
of a focal cortical lesion (tumor, stroke, inflammation), focal
epilepsy, or epilepsia partialis continua. Subcortical myoc-
lonus most often originates from the brainstem, resulting in
stimulus-sensitive, generalized jerks. Subcortical myoclonus
---
                                                                            MOvEMENT DISORDERS  219

disease. In addition, dopamine receptor–blocking agents
suppress tics.

▶Clinical Findings

A.   Tic Phenomenology
Tics are abrupt, purposeless, brief movements that occur
suddenly out of a background of normal motor activity. Tics
can be simple or complex. Simple motor tics are quick and
short-lived: blinking, ocular deviation, facial grimacing, neck
movements, and shoulder shrugging are examples of simple
motor tics. Some simple motor tics are slower, sustained,
tonic movements, such as limb muscle tensing or abdominal
tightening. Other tics have a torsional, twisting aspect that
is sustained at the peak of contraction, resembling dystonia.
    Complex tics are coordinated, sequenced stereotyped
acts, such as tapping or touching, or pantomiming an
obscene gesture (copropraxia). Complex tics may have the
appearance of compulsive acts, and indeed, the distinction
is not always clear. Compulsions are driven by an irrational
fear or anxiety that can be allayed by performing a specific
sequence of gestures or actions, such as tapping a certain
number of times.The term stereotypy or stereotyped movement describes
continuous and repetitive tic movement of restricted rep-
ertoire. Usage has linked stereotypy with developmental
delay, autism spectrum disorder, and other neurobehavioral
disorders—but in appearance, stereotypies resemble tics.
    Simple vocal or phonic tics include throat-clearing
noises, grunting, clicking, sniffing, barking, squeaking, and
other purposeless sounds. Verbal tics, consisting of repeti-
tive purposeless words and phrases, including obscenities
(coprolalia), are example of complex vocal tics.
    Most patients with tics report a premonitory sensation
or urge, coincident with a build-up of inner tension that
is relieved temporarily when the tic is released. Sometimes
patients describe their prodromal feeling as a localized sen-
sation, such as a tingling or burning, in the body part that
participates in the tic. Many individuals can temporarily
suppress their tics, especially during intense situations such
as an interview or a visit to the physician, only to experi-
ence an amplified release of tics after the encounter. It is
commonly observed that tics may decrease during times of
intense concentration, such as when playing a videogame or
participating in sports. Tics may also persist during sleep.
Echo phenomena are common in TS: Some individuals
can imitate with extraordinary speed and accuracy a sound
(echolalia) or gesture (echopraxia). A related phenomenon
is the tendency for some patients to repeat their own stereo-
typed phrases, words, and syllables, termed palilalia.

B.   Clinical Features of Tic Disorders

Tic disorders usually begin in childhood. The mean age
at onset is about 6 years, with increasing severity over the
first several years. In 96% of patients, the tics present before
myoclonus, and side-effect profile. Standard antimyoclonic
drugs include clonazepam, levetiracetam, piracetam, primi-
done, and valproic acid. Valproic acid is effective in both
cortical and subcortical myoclonus. Levodopa-carbidopa
and sodium oxybate have been reported to benefit myoc-
lonus dystonia, and the latter also may help posthypoxic
cortical myoclonus.

  Dijk JM, Tijssen MA. Management of patients with myoclo-
     nus: Available therapies and the need for an evidence-based
     approach. Lancet Neurol 2010;9:1028–1036. [PMID: 20864054]
  Eberhardt    O,    Topka    H.   Myoclonic      disorders.    Brain  Sci
     2017;7(8):103. [PMID: 28805718]


   ▼▼TOURETTE SYNDROME & TIC DISORDERS


                ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS

▶   Chronic disorder of motor and vocal tics, usually begin-
    ning before the age of 21
▶   Male predominance
▶   Frequently familial
▶   Frequently associated with attention-deficit/hyperactiv-
    ity disorder (ADHD) and obsessive-compulsive disorder
    (OCD)


▶General Considerations

Tic disorders are conditions that cause sudden, repetitive,
stereotyped, purposeless brief actions, gestures, sounds, and
words. The prototype tic disorder, Tourette syndrome (TS),
was described in a seminal 1885 report by George Gilles de la
Tourette, in which several cardinal observations were made:
onset during childhood, the hereditary nature of the condition,
male predominance, and association with psychiatric disease.
     TS is worldwide in distribution, with a 3:1 male gender
preponderance. Estimates of the prevalence of TS in the
population vary markedly, ranging as high as 4.2%, depend-
ing on the methodology of the study. The prevalence of all
types of tic disorders is considerably higher, in the range of
20%. Studies of schoolchildren with learning difficulties tend
to show a higher prevalence of TS. Tic disorders may exist
in pure form, but they are often associated with comorbid
psychiatric symptoms, as described later.
     Despite the overwhelming clinical evidence that most
cases of tic disorder are familial, no gene for TS has been
identified. The cause of tics is unknown, but the leading
hypothesis postulates a heightened sensitivity of dopamine
receptors in the caudate and putamen, termed the dopamine
hypersensitivity hypothesis. This notion is supported by
the clinical observation that tics occur in many disorders of the
basal ganglia, including Parkinson disease and Huntington
---
             220                                                    CHAPTER 15


Table 15–15.         Primary tic disorders.
           Diagnosis                                Criteria

 Tourette syndrome              Presence of multiple motor and vocal tics
                                Age at onset <21 y
                                Tics must occur many times daily, nearly every
                                    day, over a period of >1 y
                                Disturbance causes marked distress or signifi-
                                    cant impairment in daily functioning
                                Condition cannot be ascribed to known neuro-
                                    logic disorder (symptomatic or secondary
                                    tic disorder)
 Transient tic disorder         Duration of tic disorder <1 y

 Chronic tic disorder           Chronic motor or chronic vocal tics (but not
                                    both) >1 y
 Chronic single tic disorder    Chronic single motor or chronic single vocal tic

 Adult-onset tic disorder       Tic disorder that begins after the age of 21 y
                                Two temporal patterns: de novo adult-onset tics
                                    and recurrent childhood tics: a tic disorder
                                    that went into remission and recurred during
                                    adulthood


Group in 1993, are listed in Table 15–15. The most com-
mon and mildest tic disorder is transient tic disorder
(TTD), estimated to occur in up to 24% of schoolchildren.
The disorder is characterized by tics that go into perma-
nent remission within 1 year of onset, and so the diagnosis
can only be made retrospectively. Chronic multiple tic dis-
order (CMTD) is a syndrome of multiple motor or vocal
tics, but not both. Chronic single tic disorder (CSTD) is
a condition in which patients experience only a single,
recurrent motor or vocal tic. Such a classification is artifi-
cial, because all tic disorders represent variants that share
a common underlying pathophysiology and genetic pre-
disposition. The severity of a tic disorder is independent
of the temporal profile, because a patient with a single,
disruptive tic may be more disabled than an individual
with multiple mild tics.

▶Differential Diagnosis

Tics can usually be differentiated from other major types
of hyperkinetic movements because they are uniquely ste-
reotyped and usually preceded by a premonitory sensation.
A blinking tic may have the appearance of blepharospasm,
but the presence of tics at other body sites marks the condi-
tion as a tic disorder. Furthermore, although tics typically
begin in childhood, blepharospasm is largely a disorder with
onset in adult life. Complex motor tics may be difficult to
differentiate from compulsions, and indeed many patients
exhibit both types of behaviors. Tics occur automatically,
with little premeditation, whereas compulsive motor acts are
deliberately performed, purposeless actions often driven by
age 11. The most common initial symptom is eye blinking,
and during the course of the disorder, nearly all patients
experience tics involving the face and neck. Vocalizations
are reported as the initial symptom in about one third of
patients, and the most common phonic tic is throat-clearing.
Sniffing and coughing are frequent phonic tics that can be
quite disruptive and trigger an initial medical evaluation for
asthma or an otolaryngeal problem. Coprolalia, the most
notorious and potentially disabling of tics, is present only in
a small minority of patients with tic disorders, estimated at

less than 3%.
     About 50% of TS patients demonstrate symptoms of
OCD, such as compulsive checking, counting, obsessive
orderliness,      hoarding,       and    obsessive     fears    or   worries.
About half of patients with TS show evidence of ADHD,
manifested by inattention, distractibility, impulsivity, and
hyperactivity, or pure attention deficit disorder without
hyperactivity (ADD). Boys with TS are more likely to
have ADHD symptoms, whereas girls with TS have OCD
symptoms. In contrast to tics, ADHD and OCD symptoms
are significantly associated with impaired emotional and
social adjustment. A small number of individuals manifest
self-injurious behavior. In addition to ADHD and OCD,
the behavioral spectrum of TS includes conditions such
as generalized anxiety disorder, panic attacks, phobias,
and mood disorder. Overall, patients with TS have normal
intelligence.

C.   Classification of Tic Disorders

The spectrum of tic disorders ranges from mild, transient
tics to multiple, chronic, disabling tics with associated psy-
chopathology. For the purpose of diagnostic clarity, classifi-
cation systems have evolved using standard clinical criteria.
Primary tic disorders are “essential” idiopathic conditions in
which the tics represent the only neurologic sign.
     Secondary tic disorders are neurologic disorders in which
tics are part of a larger neurologic syndrome that may include
developmental delay, parkinsonism, dystonia, chorea, or
a known genetic or acquired neurologic injury, including
trauma, infection, or stroke. Secondary tic disorders almost
always result from lesions of the basal ganglia. Among the
many neurodegenerative causes of tic disorders are Hun-
tington disease, neuroacanthocytosis, and Parkinson disease.
The Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders
Associated With Streptococcal infections, or PANDAS, is a
concept of some controversy suggesting that a large number
of cases of tic disorders and obsessive-compulsive behaviors
result from an immune-mediated cross-reaction between
streptococcal infection and the basal ganglia. The strength
of the association is weak, however, and does not justify
the treatment of routine TS with antibiotics or immune-
modulating therapy, such as plasmapheresis or intravenous
immune globulin.
     The classification criteria for primary tic disorders,
formulated by the Tourette Syndrome Classification Study
---
                                                                                    MOvEMENT DISORDERS  221

an obsessive idea and may be repeated a specified number of
times in a certain order.

▶Treatment
A.   General Approach

The first step in the management of TS is to determine
whether treatment is even required. The goal of treatment
is not to achieve complete tic suppression but to allow a
patient to function and live normally. It is always important
to consider the treatment of tics in the context of the associ-
ated psychopathology (ADHD, ADD, OCD, anxiety, depres-
sion, personality disorder), which, if present, can be more
disabling than the tic disorder. Furthermore, it is critically
important to target the most distressing or disabling feature
in the treatment plan. A comprehensive approach involves
psychiatric evaluation and treatment, education of patients,
family members, and school personnel, restructuring the
school environment, and supportive counseling. In recent
years, there has been increasing emphasis on behavioral
modification techniques for controlling tics, although fur-
ther study is needed.























▶Prognosis
The course of tic disorders is unpredictable, marked by tic
patterns that evolve, wax, and wane, varying in severity and
prevalence over time. The treatment of tic disorders is purely
symptomatic, and there is no evidence that it has any effect



Table 15–16.        Agents for treating tic disorders.

                    Usual Effective
      Drug          Dose (mg/day)             Potential Adverse Effects
 Clonidine         0.05–0.5            Drowsiness, hypotension

 Guanfacine        0.5–4               Drowsiness, hypotension
 Clonazepam        0.25–2              Drowsiness, irritability

 Tetrabenazine     12.5–100            Drowsiness, hypotension, depression,
                                          parkinsonism
 Reserpine         0.25–3              Drowsiness, hypotension, depression,
                                          parkinsonism
 Risperidone       0.5–12              Parkinsonism, weight gain, risk of
                                          tardive dyskinesias

 Olanzapine        2.5–15              Parkinsonism, risk of tardive dyskinesias
 Pimozide          0.5–10              Parkinsonism, risk of tardive
                                          dyskinesias, retinopathy,
                                          prolonged QT interval

 Fluphenazine      1–5                 Parkinsonism, risk of tardive dyskinesias
 Haloperidol       0.5–20              Parkinsonism, risk of tardive dyskinesias

pimozide have actually been approved by the FDA for the
treatment of TS. The list of incompletely evaluated agents
for treating tics is long and includes the dopamine agonist
ropinirole and nicotine. Patients with focal tics restricted
to a small body part, such as blinking tics or a stereotyped
neck twitch, may be treated successfully using injections of
botulinum toxin.
    Patients with associated ADHD or OCD may require
specific treatment, because drugs used for tic suppression
do not help these behaviors. ADHD symptoms are treated
using psychostimulants, and OCD symptoms are treated
using serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Although many patients
with tic disorders are followed by pediatricians or primary
neurologists, a psychiatrist may be required to prescribe
and supervise the required pharmacotherapy. The phar-
macologic treatment of TS is summarized in Table 15–16.
Many of the agents in common use are not approved for this
indication, and caution must be exercised to avoid adverse
effects and medication interactions. The dose ranges for each
agent are provided, but it is important for clinicians to tailor
treatment to the individual and seek the advice of specialists,
including psychiatrists, in complex cases.
                   B.   Pharmacotherapy
                   Medication therapy should be considered only if the symp-
                   toms of TS are functionally disabling and not remediable
                   by nonpharmacologic interventions. A number of thera-
                   peutic agents are available to treat the symptoms of TS, and
                   each medication should be chosen on the basis of specific
                   target symptoms and potential side effects. For example,
                   tic suppression may be the most important goal for one
                   patient, whereas treatment of OCD may take precedence
                   in another.
                        The choice of medication depends on the severity of
                   symptoms, side-effect profile, presence of comorbid psy-
                   chopathology, and the physician’s experience. For control-
                   ling tics, centrally acting α-2 agonists, such as clonidine or
                   guanfacine, are considered drugs of first choice because of a
                   favorable side-effect profile. Clonazepam may be helpful in
                   the treatment of tics and is well-tolerated in children. Medi-
                   cations that reduce or blunt dopaminergic transmission pre-
                   dictably suppress tics, but they carry a higher risk of adverse
                   effects. The catecholamine-depleting agents tetrabenazine
                   and reserpine are effective tic-suppressing agents, but they
                   may cause hypotension, depression, sedation, and reversible
                   parkinsonism.
                        Neuroleptic drugs (haloperidol, risperidone, trifluo-
                   perazine, molindone, thiothixene, olanzapine, ziprasidone,
                   pimozide, and most recently aripiprazole), which act as
                   dopamine receptor antagonists, are the most predictably
                   effective tic-suppressing medications but cause weight
                   gain, depression, sedation, and they also carry a small but
                   definite risk of inducing permanent tardive dyskinesia.
                   Risperidone has been shown in a number of studies to
                   reduce tic frequency and intensity. Only haloperidol and
---
            222                                                  CHAPTER 15

self-limited or chronic, persistent, and irreversible. The
range of abnormal movements caused by DRBAs is wide,
and it is important for clinicians to recognize the individual
drug-induced syndromes because (1)                acute drug reactions
are immediately treatable if recognized and (2) the appear-
ance, or phenomenology, of the abnormal movements
comprising a tardive        syndrome determines treatment and
prognosis. Because drug-induced movement disorders are
iatrogenic, and sometimes permanent, it is essential that
clinicians warn patients about their potential to occur when
prescribing these medications.
    The entire category of movement syndromes caused
by DRBAs is sometimes conflated as “extrapyramidal syn-
drome” (EPS), but the term vastly oversimplifies a com-
plex group of disorders, each with its own distinct clinical
features,    therapeutic     approach,      and    prognosis.     Tardive
movement disorders tend to appear late in the course of
treatment, hence the term          tardive. DRBAs may also cause
acute movement disorders, chiefly acute dystonia and acute
akathisia. In addition, chronic exposure to DRBAs may pro-
duce reversible parkinsonism.

    Most DRBAs are neuroleptics used for the treatment of
psychosis, and although many newer agents are marketed
as “atypical,” such as risperidone, these drugs can readily
induce parkinsonism and tardive dyskinesias. To date, all
of the newest DRBAs, including lurasidone, aripiprazole,
ziprasidone, paliperidone, among other recently developed
agents, have been reported to cause parkinsonism or tar-
dive dyskinesias. In addition, many other agents used for
depression (amoxapine), gastrointestinal ailments (metoclo-
pramide), and cardiac disease (flunarizine) are DRBAs with
the potential to cause tardive syndromes (Tables 15–17
and 15–18).
    The risk of developing a tardive syndrome is related to
the avidity of D2 receptor binding and blockade but presum-
ably also to individual susceptibility factors that have not
been elucidated. The only antipsychotic agents that appear
to have little or no risk of inducing a tardive syndrome are
(1) clozapine and quetiapine, which have weak affinity for
D2 receptors and appear to exert their antipsychotic effects



Table 15–17.        Neurologic adverse effects of dopamine
receptor antagonists.
 Acute reactions
 • Acute dystonia
 • Acute (or subacute) akathisia
 Drug-induced parkinsonism
 Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
 Tardive syndromes
 • Classical tardive dyskinesia
 • Tardive dystonia
 • Tardive akathisia

on the long-term course of the condition. Approximately
one half of patients experience a gradual and complete
remission in tics by the end of adolescence. Tic severity
during childhood does not appear to predict the long-term
outcome. In general, the prognosis for normal occupational
and social functioning depends more on the associated psy-
chopathology than the tics.

 Frundt O, Woods D, Ganos C. Behavioral therapy for Tourette
    syndrome     and    chronic   tic  disorders.   Neurol    Clin   Pract
    2017;7(2):148–156. [PMID: 29185535]
 Piacentini J, et al. Behavior therapy for children with Tourette
    disorder:   Randomized       controlled    trial. JAMA      2010;303:
    1929–1937. [PMID: 20483969] (A controlled trial of behavioral
    therapy shows improvements in tic severity using the Yale
    Global Tic Severity Scale.)
 Quezada J, Coffman KA. Current approaches and new develop-
    ments in the pharmacological management of Tourette syn-
    drome. CNS Drugs. 2018;32(1):33–45. [PMID: 29335879]
 The Tourette’s Syndrome Study Group. Treatment of ADHD in
    children with tics: A randomized controlled trial.         Neurology
    2002;58:527–536. [PMID: 11865128] (Clinical trial describ-
    ing treatment of Tourette syndrome and ADHD concludes
    that methylphenidate can help behavioral symptoms without
    exacerbating tics.)


  ▼▼TARDIvE DYSKINESIA & OTHER
        DRUG-RELATED MOvEMENT DISORDERS


               ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS

▶  Dopamine        receptor–blocking          agents     (DRBAs)      may
   cause acute, subacute, and chronic, persistent hyperki-
   netic movement disorders
▶
   Acute dystonia and akathisia are self-limited move-
   ment disorders that are triggered by exposure to high-
   potency DRBAs
▶  Tardive dyskinesias are a group of iatrogenic, persistent
   movement disorders induced by chronic exposure to
   DRBAs and include classic tardive dyskinesias, tardive
   dystonia, and tardive akathisia
▶  Tardive syndromes have a low spontaneous remission
   rate
▶  Drug-induced         parkinsonism        is   a   dose-dependent,
   reversible syndrome caused by DRBAs


▶General Considerations

Many drugs cause abnormal movements. Of particular
note are movement disorders resulting from exposure to
neuroleptics and other agents that block central dopamine
receptors. These neurologic syndromes may be acute and
---
                                                                                  MOvEMENT DISORDERS  223

1.   Acute Dystonia
▶Clinical Findings
The acute dystonic reaction is a sustained, torsional muscle
contraction, usually confined to a body segment, occur-
ring after initial treatment using a DRBA. The classic
clinical scenario is that of a young patient who receives
a high-potency neuroleptic, such as haloperidol, in the
emergency department and subsequently develops a sus-
tained contraction of the neck muscles. All agents that
block dopamine D2           receptors can induce acute dystonic
reactions, including risperidone and other so-called “atypical”
agents. Serotoninergic agents have also been reported to
induce acute dystonic reactions. The onset of symptoms
ranges from immediately after the first dose to several days
of treatment. In about half of the cases, the acute dystonic
reaction occurs within 48 hours, and in 90% by 5 days after
starting the therapy.
    Acute dystonic reactions most often affect the ocular
muscles (oculogyric crisis), face, jaw, tongue, neck and
trunk, and less often limbs. A typical acute dystonic reaction
may consist of head tilt backward or sideways with tongue
protrusion and forced opening of the mouth, often with
arching of trunk and ocular deviation upward or laterally.
Rarely, the syndrome can recur with subsequent exposures
to D2 receptor–blocking agents.

▶Treatment
In patients with acute dystonic reactions, symptoms can be
relieved within minutes using parenteral anticholinergics or
antihistaminics. Diphenhydramine 50 mg or benztropine
mesylate 1 to 2 mg or biperiden 1 to 2 mg is given intrave-
nously and can be repeated if the dystonia does not abate
within 30 minutes. Intravenous diazepam is also effective
and can be used as an alternative therapy. If untreated, the
majority of cases resolve spontaneously within 12 to 48 hours
after the last dose of the offending agent. DRBAs with high
anticholinergic activity have a relatively low incidence rate
of acute dystonic reactions, and therefore prophylactic use of
anticholinergics (eg, benztropine) has been especially recom-
mended in young patients beginning treatment with high-
potency DRBAs.

2.   Acute Akathisia
▶Clinical Findings

Akathisia comprises two elements, one subjective and the
other objective. The subjective symptom is extreme restless-
ness and intolerance of remaining still. Patients complain
of a disturbing inner tension with vivid phrases like “I feel
that I’m jumping out of my skin” or “I’m about to explode.”
Table 15–18.        Dopamine receptor–blocking agents.
             Class                                   Drug
 Phenothiazines                 Chlorpromazine, triflupromazine
 • Aliphatic                    Thioridazine, mesoridazine
 • Piperidine                   Trifluoperazine, prochlorperazine,
 • Piperazine                   perphenazine, fluphenazine
 Thioxanthenes
 • Aliphatic                    Chlorprothixene
 • Piperazine                   Thiothixene

 Butyrophenones                 Haloperidol, droperidol
 Diphenylbutylpiperidine        Pimozide

 Dibenzazepine                  Loxapine
 Dibenzodiazepine               Clozapine, quetiapine

 Thienobenzodiazepine           Olanzapine
 Substituted benzamide          Metoclopramide, tiapride, sulpiride, clebopride,
                                    remoxipride, veralipride

 Indolone                       Molindone
 Pyrimidinone                   Risperidone

 Benzisothiazole                Ziprasidone
 Benzisoxazole                  Iloperidone
 Quinolinone                    Aripiprazole
 Tricyclic                      Amoxapine
 Calcium channel blocker        Flunarizine, cinnarizine

Adapted with permission from Fahn S, Jankovic J: Principles and Practice
of Movement Disorders. Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone/
Elsevier; 2007.

through serotoninergic mechanisms, and (2) pimavanserin,
indicated for treating psychosis in PD, which exerts inverse
agonist and antagonist activity at serotonin 2A receptors
(5-HT2A) receptors.

ACUTE SYNDROMES CAUSED BY NEUROLEPTICS


                ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
▶  Acute dystonia is a focal or segmental torsional muscle
   spasms that usually occurs within hours of treatment
   using a high-potency dopamine receptor–blocking
   drug
▶  Acute akathisia is a sensation of restlessness that occurs
   within hours of treatment using a high-potency dopa-
   mine receptor–blocking drug
---
            224                                                  CHAPTER 15

The objective component, visible to an observer, are repetitive
movements of limited repertoire performed by the patient to
relieve the inner restlessness, such as marching in place, shift-
ing the limbs, writhing and rolling movements, or stereotypic
caressing or rocking movements. Some patients moan as part
of a generalized akathisic state. Most cases of acute akathisia
occur within 1 month of drug exposure, or shortly after an
increase in the dose of their neuroleptic. Akathisia may occur
in any condition of dopamine deficiency or blockade. It was
first observed in patients with advanced parkinsonism but is
now most frequently encountered as an acute side effect of
neuroleptic drugs.

▶Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of repetitive movements includes
states of agitation due to encephalopathy; pain; or psy-
chiatric disease such as agitated depression, psychosis, or
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Unusual syndromes of inner
vibrations and tremors are described in patients with parkin-
sonism, dementia, or tardive dyskinesia.






















               ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS

▶  Tardive dyskinesia is a syndrome of stereotyped, choreic
   movements involving the face and distal extremities
   caused by chronic exposure to DRBAs
▶  Tardive dystonia should be distinguished from classi-
   cal tardive dyskinesias because it consists of sustained,
   torsional, often disabling muscle spasms that affect any
   part of the body
▶  Tardive akathisia is a syndrome of chronic restlessness
   resulting from exposure to dopamine receptor–blocking
   drugs
▶  Tardive syndromes have a low rate of spontaneous
   remission and often cause permanent disability


▶General Considerations
Tardive syndromes are late, persistent abnormal movements
induced by chronic exposure to DRBAs. The risk of devel-
oping a tardive syndrome is proportional to its dopamine
D2   receptor affinity and the duration of drug exposure,
although some cases have appeared within weeks of the
first doses. The three main tardive syndromes are (1) clas-
sical tardive dyskinesia, (2) tardive dystonia, and (3) tardive
akathisia. Tardive dyskinesias are hypothesized to result
from permanent alterations in synaptic dopaminergic sensi-
tivity induced by dopamine receptor blockade.
    When a tardive syndrome develops, gradual withdrawal of
the offending agent should be considered. Abrupt withdrawal
of the inciting agent is associated with a more severe emer-
gence of abnormal movements. General treatment guidelines
parkinsonism also occurs increasingly with advanced age, in
parallel with the incidence of idiopathic PD.
    Drug-induced parkinsonism is typically reversible when
the medication is reduced or discontinued, but sometimes
the remission of symptoms takes many months. When par-
kinsonism develops in a patient receiving neuroleptics, the
adverse effect should be weighed against the benefits of treat-
ment. If a patient has strong need for DRBA therapy, some
degree of parkinsonism may be tolerable. For patients at risk
for falling due to drug-induced parkinsonism, a change in
therapy should be considered, either reducing the dose of
neuroleptic or replacing the DRBA with quetiapine, pima-
vanserin or clozapine. There is little evidence that dopamine
agonists or levodopa ameliorate drug-induced parkinsonism
in the presence of a DRBA. Some patients show persisting
parkinsonism despite prolonged discontinuation of neuro-
leptics, probably reflecting the development of actual PD; no
pathologically proven case of tardive parkinsonism exists.

TARDIVE SYNDROMES

        ▶Treatment
        Acute akathisia is self-limited, disappearing on discontinu-
        ation of the offending neuroleptic. Acute akathisia can be
        controlled by anticholinergics when neuroleptics need to be
        continued; other agents that can reduce akathisia include
        β-blockers, clonidine, and mirtazapine.
        NEUROLEPTIC-INDUCED PARKINSONISM


                       ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS

        ▶
           Dose-dependent parkinsonism caused by DRBAs
        ▶  The syndrome may be clinically indistinguishable from
           classic PD
        ▶  Parkinsonism gradually resolves if the offending agent
           is removed


        Neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism is a dose-related side effect
        of DRBAs and may be indistinguishable in appearance from
        idiopathic PD. It develops with use of either DRBAs or dopa-
        mine-depleting drugs such as reserpine and tetrabenazine. All
        neuroleptics can induce parkinsonism in proportion to their
        D2 receptor affinity, the dosage, and duration of treatment,
        with the exception of clozapine and quetiapine; other agents
        that can induce mild reversible parkinsonism include valproate
        and calcium channel blockers. The incidence of drug-induced
        parkinsonism in patients taking DRBAs varies from 15% to
        60%. Women are almost twice as frequently affected as men,
        a reverse of the ratio in idiopathic PD. Neuroleptic-induced
---
                                                                                       MOvEMENT DISORDERS  225

repetitive, patterned choreic movements of the toes and fin-
gers, the latter sometimes termed piano-playing movements.
Sometimes, there is rhythmic rocking of the trunk.

▶Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of choreic movements of the face
includes Huntington disease, idiopathic dystonia of the face
(primary oromandibular dystonia, or Meige syndrome),
senile and edentulous chorea of the face, branchial myoc-
lonus, facial tics, and myokymia. In tardive dyskinesias, the
pattern of the movements is typically rhythmic, repetitive,
and stereotypical, in contrast to the orofacial chorea seen
in Huntington disease, which is random and unpredictable.

▶Treatment
The most potent agents for treating tardive dyskinesias
are catecholamine depletors and, paradoxically, DRBAs.
The rationale for using dopamine-depleting drugs, such as
reserpine and tetrabenazine, is that these agents effectively
reduce dopaminergic synaptic activity, thereby reducing
tardive dyskinesia symptoms, without exposing the brain to
an offending DRBA. These agents are slowly titrated to the
point of mild parkinsonism, usually reaching a dose range of
reserpine 0.5–2 mg daily or tetrabenazine 25–100 mg daily.
These agents may cause adverse effects that include parkin-
sonism, hypotension, akathisia, sedation, and depression,
and are contraindicated in patients with depression.
    The newer agent, valbenazine, a vesicular monoamine
transporter type 2 [VMAT2] treats tardive dyskinesia by
reversibly impairing the dopamine transporter as it loads
dopamine into synaptic vesicles for release, thereby reduc-
ing symptoms associated with dopamine hypersensitivity.
Although tardive dyskinesia can be temporarily suppressed
using increasing doses of DRBAs, continuing exposure to these
agents may lead to worsening of the movements in the long
term. α-Methylparatyrosine, a competitive inhibitor of tyro-
sine hydroxylase, is not very effective when used alone but can
be a potent antidopaminergic drug when combined with other
presynaptically acting drugs, such as dopamine depletors.
2.   Tardive Dystonia

▶Clinical Findings

Tardive dystonia differs from tardive dyskinesias in that the
movements are sustained and interfere with normal motor
function. Just as DRBAs may induce acute dystonia, persistent,
sustained, disabling dystonic movements may result from
chronic DRBA exposure. Tardive dystonia, which resembles
idiopathic dystonia, is more disabling than classical tardive
dyskinesia. The combination of retrocollis, trunk arching
backward, internal rotation of the arms, and extension of the
elbows and flexion of the wrists is a frequently observed pat-
tern in severely disabled patients. The onset of tardive dystonia

Table 15–19.         General guidelines for treating tardive
syndromes.
 •  Taper and slowly eliminate causative agents, if clinically possible. Avoid sudden
    cessation of these drugs, which may exacerbate symptoms.
 •  If it is necessary to treat the movements, the drugs of first choice are the
    dopamine-depleting drugs reserpine, tetrabenazine, and α-methylparatyrosine.
    It is important to monitor the development of depression, hypotension,
    sedation, and parkinsonism.
 •  If dopamine-depleting agents do not help, consider a trial of clozapine or
    quetiapine.
 •  Dopamine receptor–blocking agents may be used as medications of last resort
    for tardive syndromes, despite the risk of worsening the syndrome over the
    long term.
 •  Globus pallidus stimulation should be considered for disabling tardive dystonia
    if medication treatment fails.

for tardive syndromes are provided in Table 15–19. The
remission rate for tardive syndromes is unknown, and per-
manent symptoms may occur.


1.    Classical Tardive Dyskinesia

▶Clinical Findings
Dyskinesia is a general term simply meaning abnormal move-
ments. Over the years, tardive dyskinesia has become syn-
onymous with the first described complication of long-term
dopamine receptor antagonist therapy: continuous, repetitive,
rhythmical, stereotypic movements involving oral, buccal,
and lingual areas. Prevalence estimates range from 0.5–65%
in the literature, but is probably closer to 12% in patients
on chronic haloperidol treatment. Older age, female gender,
cumulative drug exposure, and the presence of an affective
disorder are associated with increased prevalence of classi-
cal tardive dyskinesia; African-Americans appear to have a
higher risk than Caucasians. In the past decade, the incidence
of tardive dyskinesias may be in slight decline due to the use
of second-generation D2 antagonists, which demonstrate less
receptor blocking affinity. On the other hand, children are
increasingly treated for psychiatric symptoms using “atypical”
neuroleptics, so the long-term incidence of tardive dyskinesia
in this population must be carefully tracked.
     Classical tardive dyskinesia causes a pattern of repetitive,
complex chewing motions, occasionally with lip-smacking
and opening of the mouth, tongue protrusion, lip pursing,
and sucking movements. The mouth movements in classical
tardive dyskinesia are readily suppressed by patients when
they are asked to do so, and they cease during talking or
eating. Because tardive dyskinesias do not interfere with basic
functions, patients are often unaware of their movements.
The constant lingual movements may lead to tongue hyper-
trophy, and macroglossia is a common clinical sign. Tardive
dyskinesias may also cause limb movements, usually distal,
---
            226                                                   CHAPTER 15

NEUROLEPTIC MALIGNANT SYNDROME


                ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS
▶
   Fever, rigidity, and changes in mental status, with
   elevated muscle enzymes, dehydration, and autonomic
   instability
▶  The syndrome usually develops on stable therapeutic
   doses of DRBAs
▶  Must be distinguished from serotonin syndrome, malig-
   nant hyperthermia, acute generalized parkinsonism or
   dystonia (“dystonic storm”), and other causes of meta-
   bolic encephalopathy


▶Clinical Findings
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) is an idiosyn-
cratic, potentially life-threatening syndrome consisting of
(1) hyperthermia, usually with other autonomic distur-
bances such as tachycardia, diaphoresis, and labile blood
pressure; (2) extrapyramidal signs, usually muscle rigidity
or dystonia, and often with elevated muscle enzymes; and
(3) altered mental status, such as agitation, inattention, and
confusion. The pathophysiologic mechanism of NMS and
the individual susceptibility factors are not well understood.
    NMS usually begins abruptly while the patient is on
therapeutic, not toxic or supratherapeutic, dosages of anti-
psychotic medication. All the symptoms are fully manifest
within 24 hours of onset and reach a maximum severity
within 72 hours. There appears to be no relationship between
the duration of therapy and the development of symptoms,
as NMS can develop soon after the first dose or at any time
after prolonged treatment. Recovery usually occurs within
one to several weeks, but the syndrome is fatal in 20–30%
of cases. Prolonged hyperthermia and generalized muscle
contractions may cause rhabdomyolysis, with renal failure.
Muscle biopsies show swelling, edema, and often vacuolar
changes in muscle fibers. All agents that block dopamine
D2 receptors can induce NMS, including risperidone, olan-
zapine, aripiprazole, and other “atypical” neuroleptics; the
only antipsychotics that do not induce NMS are clozapine,
quetiapine, and pimavanserin. The differential diagnosis
includes malignant hyperthermia, serotonin syndrome, and
acute baclofen withdrawal, in addition to fever of any cause
in the intensive care unit; the diagnosis depends on an accu-
rate history of drug exposure and interactions.

▶Treatment

Treatment of NMS consists of discontinuing the DRBAs and
providing supportive measures. Rapid relief of symptoms
usually follows administration of dantrolene, bromocriptine,
or levodopa. Reexposure to dopamine receptor antagonists
does not necessarily lead to recurrence of NMS. Residual
ranges from days to years after exposure to a DRBA. Severe tar-
dive dystonia is more common in young men, whereas severe
classical tardive dyskinesia is more common in older women.

▶Treatment
As with classical tardive dyskinesia, the most effective medica-
tions for tardive dystonia are antidopaminergic drugs, either
dopamine depletors or DRBAs, but a smaller percentage
of patients improves. As with classical tardive dyskinesia,
increasing doses of DRBAs might temporarily help tardive
dystonia, but continuing exposure may cause worse move-
ments over time. In tardive dystonia, anticholinergics (eg,
benztropine or trihexyphenidyl) are almost as effective as
antidopaminergic drugs. The atypical antipsychotic, clozap-
ine, is been helpful in some patients. For medically intractable
tardive dystonia, bilateral globus pallidus interna [GPi] stimu-
lation using implantable electrodes can be effective.

3.   Tardive Akathisia

▶Clinical Findings

Tardive akathisia is a rare syndrome of restlessness and
intolerance of remaining still, coupled with continuous,
stereotyped, repetitive pacing and fidgeting movements.
Tardive akathisia resembles acute akathisia in its subjec-
tive sense of intolerance or remaining still, and its outward
manifestations of restlessness, except that the tardive form is
persistent and may be permanent.
▶Treatment

Tardive akathisia can be helped by reserpine and tetrabena-
zine. In this respect, the clinical pharmacology more closely
resembles that of classical tardive dyskinesia than acute
akathisia. Opioids, such as codeine 15–60 mg daily, are
reported to be beneficial in reducing the sensation of rest-
lessness in chronic akathisia. Most of the patients develop
tardive akathisia within the first 2 years of treatment.

 Bhidayasiri R, Jitkrisadakul O, Friedman J, Fahn S. Updating
    the recommendations for treatment of tardive syndromes:
    A systematic review of new evidence and practical treatment
    algorithm. J Neurol Sci 2018; 1–9. [PMID: 29454493]
 Factor SA, et al. Effects of valbenazine in participants with tardive
    dyskinesia: Results of the 1-year KINECT 3 extension study.
    J Clin Psychiatry 2017;78(9):1344–1350. [PMID: 29141124]
 Hauser RA, et al. KINECT 3: A phase 3 randomized, double-blind
    placebo-controlled trial of valbenazine for tardive dyskinesia.
    Am J Psychiatry 2017;174(5):476–484. [PMID: 28320223]
 Savitt D, Jankovic J. Tardive syndromes. J Neurol Sci 2018;389:
    35–42. [PMID: 29506749]
 Stegmayer K, Walther S, van Harten P. Tardive dyskinesias asso-
    ciated with atypical antipsychotics: Prevalence, mechanisms
    and management strategies. CNS Drugs             2018;32(2):135–147.
    [PMID: 29427000]
---
                                                                               MOvEMENT DISORDERS  227

to move the legs or walk about, which immediately relieves
the unpleasant sensations. Symptoms typically begin inter-
mittently and may be mild, but they may be debilitating and
completely disruptive to sleep and necessitate medical inter-
vention. Some patients experience leg restlessness during the
day or in wakeful situations that involve immobility, such
as sitting in an audience or air travel. Patients with PD may
experience nocturnal parkinsonian akathisia after the last
evening dose of levodopa wears off; this condition resembles
RLS but lacks the signature leg paresthesias.
     RLS has long been linked to periodic limb movements
(PLMs), a movement disorder that occurs during sleep. The
full cycle of these movements consists of brief jerks of either
leg, dorsiflexion of the great toe and foot, and a briefly sus-
tained tonic flexion spasm of the entire leg; the movement
has the appearance of an exaggerated Babinski or flexor with-
drawal reflex. The limb movements tend to recur every 20 sec-
onds or so in trains that may last for hours. PLMs usually occur
during stage 1 and stage 2 sleep and decrease in deeper sleep
stages. Present in more than 80% of patients with RLS, PLMs
also occur in other sleep disorders, including narcolepsy and
REM behavior disorder, a condition of acting out vivid dreams.
     In recent years, a number of genetic risk factors for RLS
have been identified, although a specific causative gene has

not yet been found. In families with RLS, the disorder is
transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait. Several medical
conditions are associated with an increased prevalence of RLS,
including iron deficiency, uremia, peripheral neuropathy,
diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, pregnancy, gastric surgery, and
the fibromyalgia syndrome. Patients with PD experience leg
restlessness, but the true prevalence of RLS in PD is uncertain.

B.   Laboratory Findings
Laboratory testing in RLS is aimed at identifying secondary
causes of the syndrome. Iron studies and ferritin levels are
the most important tests. Additional testing includes rou-
tine serum chemistry. Electrodiagnostic testing should be
performed in patients with symptoms or signs of peripheral
nerve dysfunction. In selected cases, a routine sleep study, or
polysomnography, will reveal an increased amount of noc-
turnal movement and wakeful periods, delayed sleep onset,
and PLMs of sleep.

▶Differential Diagnosis
It is important to distinguish RLS from akathisia, an intol-
erance of remaining still or sitting that may occur due to
exposure to DRBAs or in PD. In RLS, the sensory discomfort
and urge to move are localized to the legs, unlike in akathisia,
which causes generalized discomfort or restlessness. RLS can
be distinguished from nocturnal leg cramps, which cause
painful muscle contractions, tightness, and tenderness. RLS
must further be differentiated from peripheral neuropathy,
radiculopathy, reflex sympathetic dystrophy, and other
localized sensory disturbances that can involve the legs;
catatonia lasting weeks to months has been reported after
recovery from the acute syndrome, with some individuals
responding to electroconvulsive therapy.


 Trollor JN, Chen X, Sachdev PS. Neuroleptic malignant syn-
    drome associated with atypical antipsychotic drugs. CNS Drugs
    2009;23:477–492. [PMID: 19480467]


  ▼▼RESTLESS LEGS SYNDROME

               ESSENTIALS OF DIAGNOSIS


▶  A syndrome of restlessness and unpleasant sensations
   in the legs, which is relieved by moving or walking
▶  Associated with periodic limb movements of sleep
▶  Chronic, progressive course
▶
   Responsive to dopamine agonists, opiates, and other
   agents


▶General ConsiderationsEnglish
Thomas      Willis,    17th    century                  physician,      first

described a condition of leg restlessness (“unquietness”)
and involuntary movements that interfered with sleep and
was relieved by walking. As fully delineated by Ekbom, rest-
less legs syndrome (RLS) is a chronic condition that usually
begins during middle age and worsens with time. RLS is a
circadian disorder that typically begins in the evening and
may progressively worsen during the night. The disorder
is common, affecting 3–10% of individuals. Many cases are
familial, inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. The
cause of RLS is unknown, but the disorder is associated with
iron-deficiency anemia, uremia, and peripheral neuropathy.
RLS    frequently     responds      to   dopaminergic        medication,
implicating a role of central dopamine pathways in the
pathophysiology of the disorder.

▶Clinical Findings
A.   Symptoms and Signs
The key diagnostic features of RLS include ill-defined discom-
fort or unusual sensations (“dysesthesias”) in the legs, some-
times described as intolerable tingling, crawling, creeping
[“formication”], stretching, pulling, or prickling sensations
(Table 15–20). Individuals with RLS usually do not describe
their leg discomfort as painful muscular cramping or aching,
a point of differentiation from nocturnal leg cramps. The
legs are invariably involved, usually bilaterally, whereas the
trunk and arms are rarely affected. RLS typically occurs dur-
ing rest or sleep, or when patients are drowsy and attempting
repose. The discomfort is associated with an irresistible urge
---
     228                                                    CHAPTER 15

                                                                                       are first-line drugs for RLS. Unfortunately, dopamine drug
Table 15–20.        Clinical features of restless legs syndrome.                       treatment is sometimes associated with rebound, an increase
 Diagnostic Features                                                                   in symptoms when the medication wears off; and                        aug-
 •  Desire or need to move the limbs, usually associated with uncomfortable or         mentation, a progressively shorter latency to the onset of
    unpleasant sensations                                                              symptoms, necessitating earlier and higher dosing of dopa-
 •  Symptoms of motor restlessness                                                     minergic medication. For this reason, calcium α-2-δ ligands
 •  Symptoms worse or exclusively present at rest, with at least partial or temporary  (pregabalin, gabapentin), while less effective, are sometimes
    relief by activity                                                                 preferred over dopamine agonists for long-term therapy.
 •  Symptoms maximal during evening and night                                          Furthermore, dopamine agonists may trigger pathologic
 Typical Features                                                                      compulsive behaviors. For severe RLS, the opioids codeine,
 •  Involuntary movements: periodic limb movements                                     methadone, and naltrexone/naloxone can be effective, but
 •  Sleep disturbance                                                                  these agents carry a risk of dependence. Clonazepam, car-
 •  Normal neurologic examination                                                      bamazepine, baclofen, and clonidine have all been reported
 •  Generally chronic course, often progressive                                        as successful treatments for RLS. Because RLS symptoms
 •  Positive family history                                                            are chronic and progressive, it is important to treat using
                                                                                       the lowest effective doses. In patients with iron deficiency
in these disorders, the symptoms do not show the nocturnal                             and RLS, treatment with iron is curative. Any treatment
predilection of RLS, and neurologic evaluation reveals nerve                           approach for RLS must also include optimization of sleep-
or root dysfunction. The painful legs and moving toes syn-                             ing habits.
drome is an unusual and rare disorder that causes cutaneous                            ▶Prognosis
pain and writhing, choreic toe movements, sometimes asso-
ciated with peripheral neuropathy.                                                     The prognosis for RLS is generally good. Although the dis-
     The differential diagnosis for PLMs comprises a wide                              order is lifelong, small doses of medication and the develop-
variety of normal and abnormal movements in sleep, includ-                             ment of optimal sleep hygiene usually keep the symptoms
ing hypnic jerks, normal postural shifts, nocturnal seizures,                          under control.
parasomnias such as sleep walking and pathologic arousals,
and REM sleep behavior disorder.                                                        Garcia-Borreguerro D, et al. Guidelines for the first-line treat-
▶Treatment                                                                                 ment of restless legs syndrome, prevention and treatment of
                                                                                           dopaminergic augmentation. Sleep Med 2016;21:1–11. [PMID:
Several classes of medication are effective in RLS, includ-                                27448465]
ing dopaminergic agents, opioids, benzodiazepines, and                                  Wijemanne S, Ondo W. Restless legs syndrome: Clinical features,
anticonvulsants, usually taken as a single dose before                                     diagnosis and a practical approach to management.               Pract
bed. The dopamine agonists pramipexole and ropinirole                                      Neurol 2017;17:444–452. [PMID: 29097554]